
What does it mean to be a good person? To act ethically and morally in the world? In the old days we might appeal to the instructions we get from God, but a modern naturalist has to look elsewhere. Today I do a rare solo podcast, where I talk about my personal views on morality, a variety of “constructivism” according to which human beings construct their ethical stances starting from basic impulses, logical reasoning, and communicating with others. 
In light of this view, I consider two real-world examples of contemporary moral controversies: 
Is it morally permissible to eat meat? Or is there an ethical imperative to be a vegetarian? Do inequities in society stem from discrimination, or from the natural order of things? As a jumping-off point I take the loose-knit group known as the Intellectual Dark Web, which includes Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris, Ben Shapiro, and others, and their nemeses the Social Justice Warriors (though the discussion is about broader issues, not just that group of folks). 
Probably everyone will agree with my takes on these issues once they listen to my eminently reasonable arguments.
 Actually  this is a more conversational, exploratory episode, rather than a polished, tightly-argued case from start to finish. I don’t claim to have all the final answers. The hope is to get people thinking and conversing, not to settle things once and for all. These issues are, on the one hand, very tricky, and none of us should be too certain that we have everything figured out; on the other hand, they can get very personal, and consequently emotions run high. The issues are important enough that we have to talk about them, and we can at least aspire to do so in the most reasonable way possible.

Support Mindscape on Patreon or Paypal.


				Click to Show Episode Transcript			

			Click above to close.  What does it mean to be a good person? To act ethically and morally in the world? In the old days we might appeal to the instructions we get from God, but a modern naturalist has to look elsewhere. Today I do a rare solo podcast, where I talk about my personal views on morality, a variety of “constructivism” according to which human beings construct their ethical stances starting from basic impulses, logical reasoning, and communicating with others.  In light of this view, I consider two real-world examples of contemporary moral controversies:  Probably everyone will agree with my takes on these issues once they listen to my eminently reasonable arguments.  Actually  this is a more conversational, exploratory episode, rather than a polished, tightly-argued case from start to finish. I don’t claim to have all the final answers. The hope is to get people thinking and conversing, not to settle things once and for all. These issues are, on the one hand, very tricky, and none of us should be too certain that we have everything figured out; on the other hand, they can get very personal, and consequently emotions run high. The issues are important enough that we have to talk about them, and we can at least aspire to do so in the most reasonable way possible. Support Mindscape on Patreon or Paypal. 
				Click to Show Episode Transcript			 0:00:00 Sean Carroll: Hello everyone and welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I’m your host, Sean Carroll and today we’re going to have another solo podcast that is to say an episode of Mindscape with only me talking. I think that when I started Mindscape which was very close to one year ago, I think we’re close to the anniversary. I’m not sure what it is, but I had in mind I’d be doing more than once every year solo episodes. But the truth is, I just had too many interesting people to talk to, so I’ve had wonderful guests coming to my horizon, and it’s been a lot of fun talking to them, so there’s no regrets there. But I do wanna mix in some more solo episodes, so I made an effort to record this one. 0:00:39 SC: The last one, of course, was a very different one in the sense that I had written a paper on why is there something rather than nothing for a scholarly collection of essays, and I could basically go through the arguments in that paper and explain them. It was kind of figured out already, it was a completed sensible work. Today, I both want to be a little bit more controversial but also be a bit more conversational. That is to say, talk about something where I don’t have a complete polished argument. So it’s more of a conversational off the cuff ruminating about things, trying to get some thoughts into people’s minds, including my own, so thinking out loud as it were. But I will be a little bit controversial, so I wanna talk about what it means to be a good person. Or in slightly more formal language, how should we think about morality and ethics? What is right? What is wrong?  0:01:30 SC: In particular, I’m a naturalist, I don’t believe in God or the supernatural. So how should naturalists think about morality? Of course, I did organize a whole workshop a few years ago on moving naturalism forward, got a bunch of people together so rather than… The idea there was rather than argue about God not existing, which we all agreed on by the construction of who was in the room, we start with God not existing. And we ask ourselves, “Okay what next?” There’s various things that happen when you’re religious, various roles that are played by religion in one’s lives. How do we replace them?  0:02:07 SC: There are a lot of issues facing naturalists. How to find meaningfulness in your life? The issues of free will and consciousness and other programs within science that are not yet complete, but clearly one of the big issues is morality. How do you be a good person? What sets the standards for right and wrong? This is something about which naturalists disagree and I think it’s good, that naturalists disagree in the sense that we are looking for the right answer, and we haven’t yet found it or at least some of us might have found it. It’s like the interpretation of quantum mechanics. Some of us might know the right answers but we don’t agree amongst ourselves. So there’s more discussing to be done. 0:02:44 SC: As I am discussing this, as I’m talking to you right now, recording this podcast, we’ve just had a wave of laws being passed in multiple states in the United States dramatically restricting access to abortion or criminalizing abortion. Abortion is of course a classic moral dilemma kind of problem. People come down on different sides of it for very different reasons. I think a lot of people… I agree with the argument that says that a lot of people who oppose abortion rights, oppose a woman’s right to choose, do so because they like restricting women’s choices, because it’s just simply a tool of oppressing women and expressing their individuality and agency. But not everyone opposes abortion for those reasons. I certainly know people who simply in good faith because of their religious beliefs, think that abortion is wrong. They think that there’s something that happens when an egg is fertilized by a sperm and that’s when you become a person and that person deserves rights. 0:03:50 SC: This is, again, not necessarily the political reason why abortion is a controversy, but it is something that an argument you can make. What should naturalists think about this? If you don’t think that there’s anything mystical or supernatural or religious or spiritual that happens at the moment of conception, then you have a whole different set of issues in front of you and concerning whether or not abortion should be legal. On the other hand, I do think that most naturalists have the same answer to that question. That’s not a hard question for naturalists. A single cell, even if that cell is a fertilized egg, most naturalists would not attribute many rights to. So most naturalists are gonna say that women should be able to get abortions at least for a certain period of their pregnancies. 0:04:37 SC: What about the hard problems? There are plenty of hard problems; the death penalty, what we should do with end of life, how we should distribute money in society, what is fair and so forth. Trolley problems are famous moral dilemmas that we can wrestle with. So I wanna talk about a couple of things that are a little bit more… Or a little bit less obvious, I should say, for the naturalist. I wanna give my general feelings about them which are immediately themselves provisional. I’m not trying to talk about things for which I think I know the right answer. 0:05:06 SC: And rather than simply focus on broad principles and abstract reasoning, I wanna bring things down to earth with a couple of examples that people have strong feelings about. I picked two examples. One example is vegetarianism. Is it ethically okay to eat meat, to eat animals and animal products? This is something that has come up both occasionally on the podcast and also on my Ask Me Anything special podcast on Patreon. If you’re a Patreon supporter you know that every month, I do an Ask Me Anything when all supporters can ask questions and I try to answer as many of them as I can. See, how I cleverly work the existence of the Patreon in there, if you wanna go to patreon.com/seanmcarroll. Or just go to the podcast web page, you can find the link and be a patreon patron. Yeah, be a patron yourself. 0:05:55 SC: So, okay, I’m not a vegetarian, but I understand, I think, why some people would become a vegetarian. I think it’s a very, very good example of a moral dilemma facing naturalists. It’s not obvious, whether we should eat meat or not, so I will talk about that. And then the second issue I’m gonna talk about is exemplified by the intellectual dark web. This is something that you might have heard about. 0:06:19 SC: It’s a group of people -Sam Harris, Jordan Peterson, Ben Shapiro -other people. Many of them are bloggers and podcasters, and they have a certain take on things that I don’t really agree with. I’m not a sort of intellectual dark web sympathizer. In some ways I am, and so when I started the podcast people were asking me whether I was becoming a member of the intellectual dark web. Not many people, not people who knew me very well. The particular thing that they talk a lot about in the intellectual dark web are issues of social justice, racism, sexism and so forth, with the angle that the people who are social justice warriors, the people who are spending a lot of their time arguing that there’s too much racism and sexism and transphobia and homophobia in our culture, and we need to do something about that have gone too far and in particular they’ve gone too far in squelching debate and being counter to the enlightenment values of open discussion and free speech. 0:07:16 SC: So I want to talk about that, and explain why I am not very sympathetic with their overall attitude. So hopefully, between having a whole bunch of committed vegetarians disagree with me, and a whole bunch of intellectual dark web supporters disagree with me, I will have annoyed or pissed off a large swath of the listenership here; that’s the goal. Or at least to get people thinking. I hope that I am thoughtful enough and open-minded enough that even if you’re a little bit annoyed, I try to give us some interesting things to think about. Like I said, my particular ideas here are not completely settled, but it’s important that we have these conversations, especially about difficult topics, especially about things with which we disagree with each other. So, let’s go. [music] 0:08:14 SC: Before examining these examples in any detail, I wanted to say a little bit about how I personally think about morality. Again, I’m not a moral philosopher myself, I am not an expert in these things. I’ve read a little bit, I’ve talked to people, I care about the issues, but I’m not gonna be giving you the complete expert opinion on the entire landscape of moral and ethical theory. I’m going to talk about how I think about it, and invite you to think about it yourself, chime in in the comment sections in various places on the internet, etcetera. Roughly speaking, when we think about morality or ethics, the rules by which we live, there’s two kinds of questions we have to talk about. One is ethics itself, the rules or the guidelines for how we behave, how we should behave. 0:09:01 SC: And then there’s meta-ethics, how we derive and justify what those rules are. So if you have a rule, “Well, you should aim for the greatest good for the greatest number,” that’s part of ethics or morality. But where did that come from? Why should we actually aim for the greatest good for the greatest number? That’s part of meta-ethics. And to make things way over-simplified, in ethics I find it always useful to distinguish between two different approaches to ethics or morality. I’m not gonna distinguish as an expert would between ethics and morality, sorry about that. There’s many different approaches to ethics and morality, but two particular examples do a very good job of illustrating kind of the space of possibilities. There’s deontology and there’s consequentialism. 0:09:48 SC: Deontology is saying that morals come from a set of rules, and if you write down the rules and you obey them, then you’ll be in good shape. Whereas consequentialists think it’s not about this is what you should do or you should not do, what matters is what the consequences of your actions are, unsurprisingly. So a utilitarian who thinks that you look for the greatest good for the greatest number, that there’s some number called utility that you can attach to different things that could happen in the world, and what you want to do is add up that number and maximize it, that would be a typical consequentialist. Whereas a Kantian, for example, Immanuel Kant suggested the categorical imperative where he says that you should make your own individual actions such that could be generalized to universal principles, that’s a more deontological approach. Both of these approaches in my view have serious problems with them. They lead us into sticky situations. 0:10:44 SC: Deontology runs into the problem that… Well, it’s the same problem that every bureaucracy runs into, right. When you have a bureaucracy, it’s typically well meaning, you want to do something like have rules for how we drive our cars on the road. But the problem is, you have to imagine that you can figure out ahead of time what every situation is in which those rules are eventually going to be applied. And eventually you come up with situations where there’s an obvious right thing to do, and the rules are telling you something different. A classic example for Kantians is the idea of lying. I’m not even sure what Kant himself believed about this, because I think if there is controversy, and I’m not an expert… But there’s the idea that you should never lie, because if you were obeying the categorical imperative then lying is not something you want to be generalized to an action that everyone should take. But what if you’re hiding a refugee in your house and a murderer wants to come and murder them right? Should you tell the murderer that the person hiding from them is in the basement? Or should you lie and say something else? So it’s easy, or not maybe easy, but at least very often possible to come up with apparent counter-examples to the deontological rules that people generally suggest. 0:12:00 SC: When it comes to consequentialism, of course it depends on your version of consequentialism. Utilitarianism again is a standard example. So the idea that you have something called utility, some number that judges or characterizes, measures, how good things are going, and we can somehow add up that number, and that’s the thing we should try to increase or to maximize, I think sounds very intuitively compelling, or plausible, but it just doesn’t hang together once you actually put it to work in the real world. There’s one famous example of a conclusion which you might not like that comes from utilitarianism, in fact it’s called the repugnant conclusion by philosopher Derek Parfit. And roughly speaking it says if you think that most or any or all human lives have positive value, that just to exist gives some positive utility or whatever it is you’re trying to maximize, then very quickly you come to the conclusion that the morally right thing to do is to just increase the number of people, no matter what else, right? You can always do better by having more people around… 0:13:13 SC: You could maximize the population of the world which sounds like not necessarily the actually right thing to do. When I’m writing my recent quantum mechanics book “Something Deeply Hidden”, I considered this puzzle in the light of the many worlds interpretation, I said if you were a naïve utilitarian trying to think about many worlds, you would say, “Look, every time I branch the wave function of the universe into two worlds, if I think that the amount of utility in each world is positive, then it’s clearly a moral good to bring new worlds into existence since I am increasing utility.” So I invented a machine called QUMAD which stands for Quantum Utility Maximizing Device. 0:13:55 SC: And the Quantum Utility Maximizing Device, QUMAD basically just takes a spin and bounces it back and forth as fast as possible measuring its value of spin up or down across perpendicular directions, and every time that happens, the wave function of the universe branches in two. So you create many more people, they all have positive utility or at least in aggregate, they have positive utilities. So you are the best person in the world in terms of how much extra utility you’re creating, even though literally no one in the world knows that you’re doing anything, you’ve had no effect on the lives of anybody. 0:14:29 SC: That sounds wrong, right? That violates our intuition. Now, in the case of many worlds, there’s a simple fix for that, just like energy conservation, you can say that in fact, the utility that you add up should be multiplied by the wave function squared, by the amplitude of that branch of the wave function squared, so then when you divide the universe in two, even though there are now two universes, the total utility doesn’t change at all. But more generally, it’s that kind of thing that gets you in trouble with utilitarianism. Our moral intuitions don’t necessarily fit easily with the ideas that there’s a number that we should maximize out there which we call the utility. 0:15:08 SC: Now, you might say, “Who cares? Why should I care about that? What difference does it make if my moral intuitions come into conflict with some systematic version of what is right and what is wrong?” If I have a moral system, if I figure it out in my mind of the once and for all correct rules of ethics and morality, then the fact that my intuitions or natural impulses go into conflict with that should be completely irrelevant. My intuitions might be wrong. The system is right, right? That’s a little bit of a sticky situation though, I think. The origin of coming up with the idea that we should maximize utility or that we should act in a way that other people should act and so forth, all of these eventually come from our moral intuitions. 0:15:52 SC: We don’t pick these things randomly, that there is some place that they originate from, and I think that our moral intuitions are it. So let’s think about that a little bit more carefully, that means moving to the meta-ethical question, right? Why are we justifying these rules in the first place? And again, there’s an enormous amount of categorization and specific theories in this field that I’m not gonna go into, but we can contrast very roughly realism versus anti-realism in morality, right? And that basically gives the definitions you might expect a moral realist thinks that moral claims like this action is good, or this action is bad or real, real in the same sense that tables and chairs and atoms and the expansion of the universe are all real, they’re objectively there roughly speaking. 0:16:43 SC: Whereas an anti-realist either might not believe in morality at all or believe that there is morality but somehow it’s subjective, that morality is a human construct that could be different, could either could have been different for different societies, or could literally be different for different people in the same society. So, this is a very good question, a very deep question and one that is nowhere near resolved as far as I can tell within the philosophical community, I think that according to a famous survey of different philosophers and their opinions about different nutty philosophical issues, the PhilPapers Survey, most philosophers are more realists, they think that there really are moral rules that objectively exist in some sense. 0:17:29 SC: I personally am not. At the very, very least, I would strongly claim that whatever moral strictures are, whatever moral guidelines are, moral rules, whatever, they don’t exist, they don’t have reality in the same sense that tables and chairs have reality. Maybe that there’s some different sense of reality that they have, I’ll be least willing to contemplate that possibility, but they don’t have reality in the same way, they’re not part of the physical universe in precisely the same way. Again, I’m completely presuming for all of this discussion that naturalism is correct. I cannot appeal to God or any supernatural being to tell me what is right and what is wrong, even if I could, that runs into famous problems that were pointed out by Plato and others, but for me, I just have the physical universe, right?  0:18:20 SC: The universe is what exists, that’s what’s real. And in that universe, I don’t see any moral stances, any moral rules. I see stuff obeying the laws of physics. Now, you may have heard on certain corners of the internet, that we should be able to derive moral rules from the universe. The idea of deriving ought from is. What you ought to do from what is actually happening out there in the world. And I’m also sympathetic to this in some sense, right? I mean my best glib argument that you should be able to derive ought from is, “Is is all that is.” I just said that I just believe the, a universe exists, right? That’s what is real, and there’s nothing extra that is real other than the universe. So if we’re going to talk about oughts, about moral rules, where else would they come from but from the universe, but from what actually is. 0:19:20 SC: But sadly, that doesn’t work. There is another option, which is to say that you can’t derive moral rules from anything. You can have moral rules, you can suggest them, you can talk about them, you can debate them and you can try to persuade others that they exist, but they’re not being derived from something deeper than that. So it is literally… I know that you might have heard I had a debate with Sam Harris about this. Sam doesn’t like to put it always in the terms of deriving “ought” from “is,” but he has put it that way sometimes, and I debate him just because it’s a logical impossibility to derive “ought” from “is.” There’s deeper in words, careful ways of saying this, but basically it is, as in computer science, you have garbage in, garbage out. In logic, you have is in, is out. 0:20:15 SC: If you make a bunch of premises to your deductive argument that are all about what does happen in the world, you could not have a conclusion that says, “Therefore this should happen in the world.” There are a number of famous attempts to do exactly that, but either they… Well, but always they cheat. Let’s put it that way. Either they cheat by using ambiguities in natural language to make you think that we’ve gone from “is” to “ought” or they smuggle in some extra assumption which has ethical power, an extra assumption about what ought to be and say, “Well, look, this is so obvious that clearly you accept it.” That’s what Sam Harris tries to do. He says certainly we shouldn’t think that the moral thing to do is to maximize misery and unhappiness for anyone. 0:21:06 SC: Well, maybe we shouldn’t. I don’t want to maximize misery for everyone, but that is an assumption. That is not something you derive from what is out there in the world. So I just want him to state that that is an assumption because then we can debate whether that’s the right assumption to make. The thing I disagree with is the idea that it’s not an assumption at all. So I don’t think that you can get moral rules just by being out there looking at the world. The world doesn’t have moral judgments. The world doesn’t care what you do, right? The world just obeys the laws of physics. If I give you the wave function of the universe, it evolves over time according to the Schrodinger equation or whatever future physics we some day have. There’s no judgments there. The wave function of the universe doesn’t say, “Oh, that was a mistake to evolve in that way. That was an ethically bad practice that you just indulged in.” 0:21:57 SC: It just goes on uncaring, unfeeling. We human beings as a part of the world, once we describe the world at a higher level of the human world, the manifest image of the world where there are people in it and those people think and reflect and act, we people judge the world. We attach moral meanings to certain actions or certain things going on out there in the world. But they’re not inherent in the world itself. 0:22:28 SC: Now there’s clearly a lot of other ways to be a moral realist even if you don’t derive ought from is in some literal sense. There’s different ways of justifying the idea that in addition to the physical reality of the world, there are once and for all objectively true moral standards. I’m not gonna go through all the different ways to do that and sort of argue against all of them, I’m just going to put forward the idea that I don’t think any of them work despite the fact that this puts me in the minority of working philosophers who are much more educated about this. There’s also a healthy minority that agree with me about this. I do think that a motivation for searching for moral realist justifications, meta ethics, often comes from the idea that we like certainty, right? And this goes back to Descartes and many other people, goes way back before that, the idea that we want absolutely once and for all certain groundings for our belief. Descartes was interested in our belief in the physical world, what we would now think of as empirical questions: Are we sure we’re not being fooled by some malevolent demon?  0:23:31 SC: But it’s very common that you really just want to be able to say, not that you, not simply that you think that was wrong what you just did, but that it is objectively wrong. It’s the same kind of impulse that people have about aesthetics, that not only is this song good in the sense that I like it or I enjoy it or other people enjoy it, but is it objectively good? There’s a sense in which it is simply better once and for all and you can’t argue against it. So I don’t believe either one of those stances. Certainly again, if you compare it to how we think about science, how we think about empirical questions about the world, if you make a statement like the universe is expanding, that’s when we can judge by going out there and looking. But crucially, it could have been different, right? We can imagine a universe which was not expanding. We can imagine a universe that is expanding, we can imagine one that’s contracting, we can imagine one that’s static. So we have many different possible universes, and then we go out and do observations, collect data to decide which of those universes we live in. 0:24:37 SC: That’s just a completely different procedure than we have for morality. Very few moral realists think, “Oh, I can imagine many different systems of ethics and morality and I’m gonna go out and do experiments and decide which one is true.” That’s generally not how it works. So I think that we need to be comfortable to get ourselves happy with the idea that morality may be something that’s important to us, but it’s constructed, it’s constructed by human beings just like bridges are very important for human beings and they’re constructed by human beings as well, or the game of basketball is constructed by human beings. Once you’ve constructed it, it’s there, but it’s not inherent in the universe itself. So this point of view, which again, I’m not gonna do justice to all the details of, but you can find it online, this goes by the name of, guess what? Moral constructivism. Moral constructivism is just the idea that what you and I take to be ethical principles are made up by human beings, not made up necessarily arbitrarily. There might be good reasons to make up some rather than others, but ultimately, they come from within us as judgments, not from out there in the world or objective principles of reasoning or logic or anything like that. 0:25:56 SC: It’s important here to distinguish between moral constructivism and moral relativism. They are closely related, but different. They’re both anti-realist versions of morality, but a relativist would say you have some sort of community, you have a society, and that society comes up with moral standards. And then what is right and wrong is judged only relative to what that society believes. And it’s sort of a quietist view of morality in the sense that if you’re not a member of that society, then you don’t get to have an opinion. You don’t get to judge, if you think that something is personally repulsive, but it’s going on in that society over there and they think it’s okay, then you don’t have the right to say anything. Whereas a constructivist doesn’t say that. A constructivist simply admits the reality that human beings are the ones who construct moral rules. But once we’ve constructed them, constructivism lets you be judgy of other people. It’s not a quietist point of view at all. If I have my moral rules and I’ve come up with them for what I think are good reasons, I can apply them, and I will and do apply them elsewhere. 0:27:03 SC: And I can use that as a justification for acting in the world, for making things better, even if other people disagree with me. Now, what I want to emphasize here is that this picture of morality given by constructivism can sound a little wishy washy, can sound like, well, it’s not strong enough for me. If I’ve still bought into this picture where I want absolute metaphysical certitude for my moral impulse, for my moral rules in some sense, then the idea that it’s just made up by people might not sound robust enough. However, I would like to point out that it is nothing more or less than what actually happens in the world. We actually do come up with our moral theories in this particular way. I think that there’s this slightly, not perfectly articulated fantasy that more realists have that says that, “If I could just find the objective moral rules, then when I came into disagreement with somebody else in the world, we could sit down over coffee and I could convince them that they were wrong, because I’m objectively right and they’re therefore objectively wrong.” 0:28:13 SC: So I don’t think that that’s actually ever what does happen. You typically would not succeed, sometimes maybe you would, good for you. But I can certainly imagine situations in which you would not succeed in using the pure force of reason to convince someone that they should obey your objectively true moral guidelines. Whereas moral constructivism says, “Yes, I come up with some moral rules that I think are the right ones. Someone else has come up with some moral rules that they think are the right ones. And we can talk about who’s right and who’s wrong, which ones should be enshrined in rules, and legislation, and laws, and things like that. And sometimes we might just disagree in a profound way and not be able to overcome that disagreement.” Guess what? This is what really happens in the world. Moral constructivism is just about bringing the way that we theorize about ethics into line with the reality of how we practice ethics in the world. 0:29:11 SC: Now, having said all that, I talk a little bit about these ideas in The Big Picture in my last book. And it’s really focusing there on these meta-ethical questions, and I argue against moral realism and in favor of constructivism. But then you wanna go from that meta-ethical stance, morals are things that we construct, to an ethical stance. Okay, so what are the morals that we should construct? And in the book, I more or less punted on that, ’cause it wasn’t the point. I didn’t want to say, “Okay, here are the rules we should use.” I made some vague gestures in that direction, but that was not what I was trying to do. What I was trying to do was to set up the idea that we can live in a way that is both moral and intellectually fulfilling in a naturalistic universe. So it still leaves us the job of coming up with the right moral rules. So how do we do that? And there’s a long, complicated process, obviously there’s work being done here. I think that there’s two crucial components about how we should go about constructing our moral rules or our ethical guidelines. 0:30:15 SC: Number one, we reflect on what our inner moral impulses are. We human beings are not blank slates, we are not devoid of moral judgment until we read our first philosophy books. We have feelings about what is right and what is wrong. So reflecting on those feelings means accepting and recognizing the fact that sometimes, our moral intuitions if you like, are not coherent, are not compatible with each other. This is part of the job of moral philosophy, to take our sort of inchoate, rambling moral intuitions and systematically turn them into something that is logically clear, that says very definite things that do not contradict each other. This is the kind of thing that we try to do using ideas like a trolley problem thought experiment. The famous trolley problem, you have a trolley headed to kill somebody. Sorry, a trolley headed to kill, let’s say five people. And there’s a switch that would move over the trolley onto a different track where only one person would die. 0:31:17 SC: If you’re a deontologist who says, “You don’t want to take an action that would bring harm to anyone,” then you do not flip the switch, ’cause that’s a rule that you’re not allowed to do it. It’s not your action that is literally hurting someone. Whereas if you’re a utilitarian that says, “Clearly, we should have the smallest number of people dying,” then you would flip the switch, no problem. And there’s no right or wrong answer. These are two different impulses that we simultaneously have. And the job of moral philosophy is to sort of reconcile them somehow. And a moral constructivist would say, “There might not be a right or wrong reconciliation once and for all, there’s no objective standard. But this is the task we have before us.” And the other thing we need to do is to communicate. The first thing to do is reflect on our inner impulses. 0:32:05 SC: The second thing we need to do is to talk to other people. Ask them what their impulses are, ask them what their theory of morality is. Again, there’s no guarantee that if we do sit down over coffee, and communicate with each other, and share our moral intuitions, and try to reason together to come up with a mutually agreeable moral system, that we will succeed. There could be fundamental irreconcilable differences that we never get over. So we figure out some political way of dealing with that. We have value diversity and pluralism in a liberal democratic society for example. So we have to figure out a way to get around that, but it’s crucial along the way to actually ask people what they care about, what they think is right and wrong, not simply to assume that we can logic our way into coming up with the objectively right answers. 0:32:54 SC: And I think at the end of the day, I’m a little skeptical, and this is a very, very tentative position on my part, so don’t take me too much at face value or too seriously. I’m tentatively thinking that there isn’t a simple maxim that sums up the right way that I believe we should be moral. I don’t believe that there’s anything quite as easy as the categorical imperative or the greatest good for the greatest number that will ever work. I think that we human beings start out as sort of a jangly bag full of moral intuitions, values, if you wanna call them, impulses that we have. And some of these come from biology and evolution, some of them come from our upbringing, some of them come from society, some of them come from our cognitive, careful, philosophically logical reflection on what we should believe and what we do believe. And at the end of the day, we’re gonna have a bunch of rules of thumb for how to deal with different situations. And we might grow and get better, and not even get better, maybe that’s a little bit of a morally realist language sneaking into my rhetoric here. 0:34:04 SC: But we evolve, let’s just put it that way. We can change over time. And what we think should be that the balance between different values, values like you should be kind to each other, you should care about other people, you should make people happy, you should not insult them, you should respect their personal space, and their liberty, and so forth. A whole bunch of values that we can all talk about and judge which should be different levels of importance in different particular situation. Now, is that unsatisfying, is that not quite as pristine and clear as you would like, especially if you’re used to the kind of theories that we get in math, or logic, or physics? Sure, it is unsatisfying if that were your standard, but maybe that should never have been the standard. Maybe we should accept the idea that morality is something that is always a little bit in flux, that we’re aiming toward it without their actually being an it that we will ever achieve. Literally, it’s about the journey rather than the destination. And we can talk to each other and we can surprise ourselves. 0:35:11 SC: We can say, “Oh yeah, I used to think that was the right thing to do, but upon reflection, after talking to people, after growing in my personal experience, and learning things, now I realize that I think that that was wrong,” and that’s a perfectly good way to live. So, with all those in mind, let’s think about how to actually take that philosophy of right and wrong and apply it to some sticky situations that we actually run across in the real world. The first test case I wanted to talk about is the notion of vegetarianism. Is it okay to eat animals? The ethics of being a meat-eater. I do think that this is a topic where, I’m a meat-eater, I’m an omnivore, if you wanna put it that way. But I think that most omnivores are un-reflective about their omnivorous-ness. I think that they grew up that way, they figure that’s fine, this is life, and that’s how it is. I do wish that most people who ate meat gave more thought to the ethics of it, to whether it was right and wrong. Of course, this is part of the motivation I had for Moving Naturalism Forward that I don’t think that naturalists or people in general give nearly enough brain power, forethought to the moral and ethical values that they live by. 0:36:24 SC: And so, I respect vegetarians who become vegetarians for ethical reasons. I think that makes sense to me why you would do that, even if I don’t end up being in agreement with it at the end of the day. So what are the arguments for not eating meat, for becoming a vegetarian? I think there’s two broad classes. Although again, there’s many little sub-arguments here, I’m not gonna go into all the details. One broad class of arguments in favor of vegetarianism comes down to the environment to more or less practical issues centered on the practice of agriculture in our actual world. I think it is a true statement and a very real concern that modern agricultural practices are very often harmful to the environment. We cultivate huge herds of cattle, and pigs, and chickens, and sheep, and lamb, and goats, and this stresses nature in ways that are very clear. These various forms of livestock create methane, which is a greenhouse gas, which leads to global warming. And also the creation of farms often involves deforestation, tearing down, or burning down trees, and hurting the environment that way. 0:37:40 SC: And I think that these worries are perfectly good worries, I completely agree with these arguments. But I think that the conclusion of these arguments is we should change the agricultural practices. We should disincentivize harming the environment. I don’t think that these are arguments for becoming a vegetarian. I think that this is an example, where believe it or not, I agree with Dick Cheney, our former Vice President in the philosophy of this. Dick Cheney was once asked about conservation of energy, not conservation of energy in the physics sense, but conserving energy in the sense of not running the heater or the air conditioner in your house or driving too much and things like that. And he said, as far as he was concerned, that was a matter of personal virtue, not a matter of public policy. And I think that’s right. I think that whether or not you let the house be a little bit cooler than is comfortable and wear a sweater to make up for that, that is a matter of personal virtue. I think that the collective behavior of many, many people doing that, well, you know what, it’s not that many people doing it, it doesn’t really make that much of an impact on the world. 0:38:43 SC: Where I disagree with Dick Cheney is that there, I believe there should be public policies that do create a penalty for hurting the environment. So if you wanted to argue for legislation to charge agro businesses money when they do things that harm the environment, because they’re in some sense poisoning the public commons in a very real way, that I could very much get behind. But I don’t think that you, or me, or any set of individual people choosing not to eat meat has a big impact on that. So that’s a way in which I would disagree with someone like Kant, who says, “You should act in the way that if everyone did it, that would be the right way to act.” I think that if not everyone is doing it, then it doesn’t really matter if it’s not otherwise ethically bad. The question is: How do we affect important, relevant, effective social change? It’s not by individual virtue, it’s by legislation, or sharp, strong demonstrations, or something like that, ways to manifest the public will. There’s various ways to get things done, me not eating hamburgers, I don’t think is really doing it. 0:39:55 SC: So the other sets of arguments which I think are more relevant for the current discussion are the more purely ethical ones about eating meat. The idea that roughly, again roughly speaking, because there’s many variations on this theme, but we assign, we might imagine assigning an objective value to life, whether it’s human life or animal life or whatever. And we might draw the line as to where life is or is not important. Some people would count plants. What about insects? What about viruses or something like that? Okay, but there’s some group of living beings, maybe just animals, maybe conscious creatures in some sense, that deserve to not have their lives ended. I’m not saying that’s true, I’m saying that is a potentially relevant, interesting moral claim. In that case, killing, whether it’s human beings or animals is simply wrong. One way of putting this is why would you think it’s okay to kill cows and pigs and then eat them, but not kill cats and dogs and horses and other animals that we choose for pets?  0:40:57 SC: So this is where the rubber hits the road, in terms of thinking through our ethical rules that we’re going to construct as good moral constructivist. Should we judge it to be wrong to kill animals in of itself? After all, we judged it to be wrong to kill humans. And you might have thought back in the day, before naturalism came along, well there was a reason why killing human was bad because there’s an objective value to human life, given by the special place that humanity has in the world, either because of God, or because of something slightly vaguely, more vaguely mystical in some way. We don’t have that anymore, so maybe the question we should be asking is not, why is it okay to kill cows, but why is it wrong to kill humans. We don’t have that objective moral standard that we had when we were religious. We have to do something different. So as a moral constructivist I would argue that it is wrong to kill human beings, but not because it’s some objectively, absolutely true reality of the moral world, not because of some quasi-mystical attribution of an unbreakable right to live on the part of human beings. 0:42:10 SC: It’s wrong because we humans generally think that killing each other is wrong. We have that moral impulse, we have that value, we have that intuition that killing each other is a bad thing. If nothing else, we human beings generally don’t want ourselves to be killed. So if I didn’t want myself to be killed and I was completely neutral on killing other people, the communication part of the way in which we come up with our moral rules would say, I would go around asking other people, “Do they want to be killed?” And most people would say, “No.” So we would agree to come up with a rule that said, “Alright, let’s not kill each other, okay?” That’s the kind of thing that happens both in the real world and in the theory of moral constructivism. Of course, I’m sure that you’re thinking out there, some people will disagree. There are some people who think that it is okay to kill people. John Wick clearly thinks it’s okay to kill people, in certain circumstances. Less fancifully, there are plenty of people who think the death penalty is okay. There’s plenty of people who think that there are just wars where you can go out and kill the enemy. 0:43:15 SC: So there’s different ways of dealing with that. You need to sort of think a little bit more subtly about when it is okay and it’s not okay to invent this rule about not killing people. And when someone is just a sociopath, someone who just wants to kill people, we lock them up, we put them in prison, at least once they have killed somebody or they have done some violent act, that’s how mature societies deal with this problem. We’ve invented a rule, and those who stubbornly insist on violating it are punished in some way. That is, again, both what we do in the real world, and I think what we should admit is what we’re doing. It’s not a matter of some objectively real rule out there. We construct the rule, and then, we enforce it. So if that’s the case, if the reason why we don’t like killing people is because we don’t want to kill or do we want to be killed, what do we start thinking about animals? And I think that, personally, my feeling is that animals are different. Now, it’s always tricky to directly draw the line between what’s an animal and what’s the human? How are we different from each other. 0:44:22 SC: If you listened to my podcast with Adam Rutherford, you know how subtle that distinction can get. But I think that there is never the less a distinction worth drawing. Obviously, human beings have eaten animals throughout history. Animals eat each other. Nature is red in tooth and claw. That’s not an argument that it’s okay to kill animals, or that it should be okay, or we should construct rules that says it’s okay. It’s just a preemption of the idea that not killing animals is somehow natural, right? The natural state is that everyone kills everyone else, or they don’t care because they’re not omnivorous. Most animals actually don’t kill other animals, but it’s not because they mind it, it’s not because they invented a law or moral structure against it, it’s ’cause they’re not interested, they don’t get any benefit from it. Where animals do benefit from killing any other animals, that’s generally what they do in human history. So, we are faced, we need to come face-to-face with this issue, that we’re inventing the rules, what rules should we invent?  0:45:27 SC: There’s a couple of things that mattered to me here when it comes to how animals are different. And it basically comes down to the communicative part of how we invent, how we construct our moral rules, and a particular ability that human beings have to conceptualize the future in certain ways. Parenthetically, I should say, of course, any time we try to draw a line between humans and animals, we might imagine humans that are injured, or handicapped or disabled, or have genetic defects or something like that, where individual human beings might not fit into this categorization that we have. But I think it’s perfectly sensible to say that where we’re choosing to draw the lines is around the human species compared to other species in the world. So I think that’s just a footnote that we’re not gonna get into in any detail. What I’m trying to do is ask what is the distinction between animals, non-human animals as a set, and human animals? And again, another parenthesis here, other people might disagree and that’s okay, and we can talk about that, that’s cool, we should do that. 0:46:31 SC: I have friends who will not eat animals, or creatures with certain advanced nervous systems. There’s a famous rule that you shouldn’t eat things with a face. So I’m drawing it between human beings and elsewhere and I’m trying to explain, why? And again, number one, there’s the communication issue, and number two, the future issues. So let me explain what I mean by that. 0:46:53 SC: The communication issue, what I mean is, that we can’t sit down with animals and discuss moral laws. The part of the inventing our morally constructed, sorry, yeah, our constructed morals, is that we talk to each other and ask what each other want. And we do this in highly abstract ways. You know, there’s some ways in which we can imagine talking, communicating with animals. That’s absolutely true. But there’s also, unmistakably, a level of abstraction that we human beings can reach that the animals can’t. We can draw up contracts, right? And it’s actually, I’m realizing literally as I’m saying this, that the boundary between these two points I’m trying to make is a very fuzzy one, the one point about how we communicate and the other about how animals conceptualize the future. 0:47:44 SC: The point being that you can certainly see that animals know about the future, they worry. In certain circumstances, things are going wrong, the thinking of the example I have in mind is that when my cats, Ariel and Caliban, think that we’re gonna take them to the vet, they get upset. They run away and hide. When we pull out the cat carriers in a way that is obviously antecedent to putting them in the cat carriers, and then getting in the car and going to the vet, they know what that means. They know that the cat carriers indicate something bad is about to happen. And I think that cats are not the single smartest other set of animals out there. So, there’s no question that animals can conceptualize the future in some way. 0:48:26 SC: But what’s important to me is the idea of conceptualizing the future in a hypothetical way, in a purely abstract way that gives us the ability to draw up mutually agreed upon rules and contracts. You can train an animal, there’s no doubt, but what you can’t do is say, “Alright, look, if you do this for me tomorrow, then next year, I will do the following thing for you.” That’s the kind of thing that as far as I know, based on the science and the neuroscience that I’m aware of, I could be wrong about this, that other species other than human beings are not capable of. So, the cats might run and hide when we pull out the cat carriers. But when Jennifer and I are just talking about, “Oh, we need to take Ariel and Caliban to the vet next week,” Ariel and Caliban do not react to that. They don’t know that it’s gonna be this bad thing. They can’t quite conceptualize that future event. 0:49:20 SC: I think that’s important because I think that that idea of how we conceptualize the future is really secretly at the heart of why I think that killing people is wrong. And again, I’m gonna keep saying this over and over again, all this is tentative, and maybe I’m wrong. So, let’s keep thinking about it together. But the example that comes to mind, again from my Quantum Mechanics book, is quantum suicide. You may have heard of this thought experiment. Max Tegmark popularized it, although other people talked about it. If you believe in the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, so you believe that when a macroscopic system observes a microscopic system, that the universe branches into multiple copies. And there’s different things going on, different measurement outcomes happening in each of those multiple copies. Then, imagine the following experiment: That you basically do a quantum measurement, with like a Geiger counter, or a spin, or something like that. And you hook up a machine where if the measurement comes out one way, you will be instantly killed. Instantly is very important because you’re not suffering, you just cease to exist right away as much as technologically possible. 0:50:30 SC: And then the other branch of the wave function where the other measurement outcome was obtained, you’re still there, nothing happens to you, okay? The idea is that in some sense, and Tegmark himself doesn’t say this, but other people have said this, you shouldn’t mind being put through this thought experiment, roughly speaking, because there’s now two branches of the wave function where there was only one. In one branch, you’re alive. You have nothing to worry about in that one. And in the other branch you don’t exist. You’re dead. Again, we’re presuming naturalism. There’s no life after death, or anything like that. So, why should you mind? There’s nothing there to be minding. There’s no you there to be upset that you got killed, okay? So, we’re putting aside issues that maybe you have friends, and they will be upset. We’re imagining an isolated loner kind of person. 0:51:16 SC: So, I don’t think that this logic works, as I explain in the book, Something Deeply Hidden. I say, “Look, imagine a classical universe in which there was a machine that could kill you instantly. So, forget about branches of the wave function. Just imagine that Newton was right, and there was only one thing that ever happened in the world, but there was a machine that could kill you instantly. You wouldn’t know that you were dying, right? You would be dead instantly. You wouldn’t suffer, and then after it happened, you’re no longer there to be upset. Should you mind if such a machine kills you? Well, my argument is I should be upset at the prospect of such a machine killing me ’cause I wanna live on. So, the reason why that would be bad is not because I would be upset after I was dead. It’s because I’m upset now at the prospect of it happening because right now I’m imagining all sorts of possible futures for myself. And that set of possibilities is abruptly terminated by this crazy machine. 0:52:14 SC: And I think that the same logic works for quantum mechanics and many worlds. I think that the prospect that in some branches of the wave function I won’t exist can upset me just as much as not existing at all in a single classical universe would be bad. And if that’s the reason why we should be upset at killing, it’s because the people now who are alive don’t like the prospect of dying, apart again from the fact that their friends might mind and so forth. 0:52:43 SC: Then, I don’t think that animals think the same way. As far as I know, that’s my reading of the literature. I don’t think that they have that sort of future oriented hypothetical imagination that lets them think about a universe in which they don’t exist. And this is crude, and subject to revision upon future scientific advances. But to me, as far as I can tell, that is a crucial difference between human beings and animals. And it’s one that makes me not attribute this right to continue existing to animals in the same way that my morally constructed rules attribute it to human beings. Now clearly, there’s a lot of details here. There’s a lot of more specific ways we could go into that. Maybe someday we’ll discover that animals do have this ability. We just didn’t realize how we could talk to them, and then I would update my beliefs. I would change my beliefs about what we can do. 0:53:44 SC: And again, it does affect questions like is it okay to murder pets, other people’s pets? Well, I think that what matters there is the human attachment to them. I think that, forget about cats and dogs versus cows and horses, I think that if you live in a culture where cats and dogs are not pets, where they are livestock, then I don’t think that there’s anything morally wrong about eating them. Go ahead. I think that the reason why in our culture, in my culture, in my house, eating cats and dogs is bad it’s because I have cats and I’m attached to them, and that’s an emotional feeling that I as a human being have and that matters to me that is considered in my moral calculations. Now, this is different than suffering, of course. Now, I did this thought experiment with an imaginary machine that ends your life instantly. That’s an imaginary machine, that’s not the real world, in the real world killing often does involve suffering, and I think that suffering is bad, and there’s no doubt that in the real world of farming animals often suffer and I disagree with that, I don’t want them to suffer. 0:54:54 SC: I am in favor of the animals on farms living as happy a life as they can up until the moment that they are killed. I think that the killing again, is sort of morally-neutral because the animals are not anticipating dying at some point in the far future because they overheard it, but the actual suffering in the moment that animals undergo I think, should be minimized as much as possible just as it should for humans. Again, the question is about how to actually make that social change and it should be about laws and regulations that make happy, I don’t know what, if there’s a technical term for the kind of farming… Humane farming, I suppose, that respects the existence on a moment to moment basis of the animals, which I do think, has some moral weight. And again, among… There’s another complication that I should mention cause morality is much harder and more complicated than physics is. We human beings might value the idea of things living, if not actual every specific thing. You can’t be too hung up on individual organisms living because we all die eventually. 0:56:04 SC: You cannot put absolute value on organisms, animals and so forth living forever ’cause that’s not plausible. Death is real and important and you must face up to it. But maybe and I think very reasonably you might care about the fact of life itself. The existence of living beings, maybe you even care about variety and diversity within the space of living beings cause maybe you think that a diverse set of species in a diverse ecosystem is an independent value. I can totally get on board with that actually, I think that its perfectly sensible to be against allowing endangered species go extinct. Preserving a variety of habitats and animal species in the world is something that I think is a perfectly reasonable value for we humans to get behind. Again, as before, I don’t think it leads us to vegetarianism. I think that we can have both the value of having a diverse ecosystem and eating meat at the same time. 0:57:09 SC: Having said all this, let me say, in case it’s not perfectly obvious, again, I totally respect people who don’t go along with this kind of thinking. I want us… I want there to be mutual respect. I don’t want to lecture vegetarians, I don’t want vegetarians lecture me, I don’t want anyone to lecture anyone else in a sort of hectoring way, I’m happy to talk about it in a rational way, and maybe someone’s mind will even be changed. Vegetarians and vegans especially have a reputation of being lecturers of pushing their values on other people. I know that there are… That vegans and vegetarians are like that, but look, there are meat eaters who are like that too. I’ve had plenty of examples of seeing meat eaters try to put their meat eating and shove it in the face of vegans and vegetarians. We tend to be defensive about our own personal values and that might be something that actually happens, but it’s not something we should be proud of, we should strive to do better. 0:58:12 SC: Which brings us to the other example I promised to talk about, the Intellectual Dark Web and their engagement with political correctness, Social Justice Warriors, things like that. I do recognize this is a subject some people are tired of, other people don’t wanna hear about, it becomes emotional and fraught, and people take sides and get very passionate about it, that’s why I put it at the end of this podcast, you’re welcome to skip it if you want to. But personally, I think it’s important that we talk about these issues. Even if it can get heated sometimes. We have to be able to have reasonable good faith dialogue about things we disagree about even if the underlying issues are by construction ones that are very, very personal, very, very close to the heart of the people who are talking about them. And why would I bring up the intellectual dark web in a discussion that supposed to be about morality and meta-ethics. 0:59:11 SC: Well, for one thing, of course, if we’re talking about social justice, justice is important part of ethics and morality. For another, I think, this is a good test case for thinking about the relationship of morality and rationality. Ethics and reason, these are two things morality and reason, that are not opposed to each other, that we need to work in concert in some way, but they’re different things. And so how exactly they come together is an important issue when we’re thinking about how to be moral. What is the role of rationality, when are we using it, when are we misusing it? The intellectual dark web was coined as a term by Eric Weinstein, Eric is the managing partner at Thiel Capital I believe, I might not get exactly his job title right. I first heard his name a few years ago when he was in the news, at least he was in The Guardian in the United Kingdom the newspaper, when there were headlines saying that there was a new theory of everything and Eric Weinstein might be the next Albert Einstein, revolutionizing physics. Many people objected to this since Eric had not actually written any physics papers including about his new theory of everything, and it doesn’t seem quite sensible to dub someone the new Einstein when they haven’t even written a paper yet. 1:00:33 SC: As far as I know, the paper still hasn’t been written, maybe it has, I haven’t kept track, but I’m pretty sure it has not revolutionized physics. I think I would have known about that, I would have been informed about that thing. But it’s just the term that Eric coined, there’s many other people in the group, Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris, Ben Shapiro, Christina Hoff Sommers, there’s a sort of ‘losin’ it’ collection of people. Nothing official, I don’t think there are membership cards or anything like that. But there’s this idea that there’s a group of people, intellectuals who are trying to reach the public through non-traditional means, not just getting fancy professorships at Ivy League universities, publishing high-profile books, getting reviewed in the New York Review, and things like that. 1:01:15 SC: I will confess that it always rubs me a little bit the wrong way, when people foreground the idea that what they’re saying is forbidden or contrarian or naughty, rather than what they’re saying is correct, or right, good ideas, not just forbidden ideas. But okay, that’s a stylistic choice that I won’t hold against them. What is the idea of the Intellectual Dark Web, other than this ‘losin’ it’ group of people, like how would you define what group of people it is, besides their methodology for using podcasts and videos not just books. So you can look on Reddit, there’s a Reddit subreddit dedicated to the IDW, as you might call them, the Intellectual Dark Web, and there it says, the term Intellectual Dark Web refers to the growing community of those interested in space for free dialogue held in good faith. 1:02:07 SC: The community exists outside of any governing body and has no biases to adhere to. It’s a collection of people willing to open rational dialogue, spanning a variety of issues from politics to philosophy. So I think this is a very problematic definition in a number of ways. It’s number one, the statement that there are no biases to adhere to, sounds rather unrealistic to me, but again, that’s not what I’m gonna focus on right now. More importantly, is that this is not a correct definition, it’s obviously not an accurate definition, if you want to define what is holding together this particular group of people. And it’s inaccurate in at least two ways. First, the idea that this particular group of people is dedicated to open free dialogue is not at all borne out by the evidence. 1:02:55 SC: The most celebrated current member of the Intellectual Dark Web would certainly be Jordan Peterson, he’s accrued a good amount of celebrity in the last couple of years. And he infamously threatens to sue people who insult him, by calling him a misogynist for example. He has called for university departments that he disagrees with, to be shut down. At one point, he was planning a website that would keep track of college courses containing what he labeled “Post-modern content” so that students could avoid them if they didn’t wanna be exposed to such ideas. 1:03:28 SC: Just a couple of weeks ago, as I’m recording this, Peterson met with Viktor Orbán, who is the president of Hungary, if you’re not up on modern Hungarian politics, Orbán is part of the populist wave that is sweeping the world, at least a mini wave. And he is, let’s just say, not a friend of free speech, let’s put it that way. Among other things, he’s cracked down on Hungarian ideas that he doesn’t agree with in many ways, so much so, that the Central European University which was located in Budapest, has fled. It’s moving to Vienna, in Austria, because of the crack down by Orbán. Peterson seemed to have a collegial meeting with Orbán, in which they bonded over their mutual distaste for political correctness. So these are not the actions of someone who is truly dedicated to the ideals of free speech. 1:04:22 SC: Members of The IDW who are also not uniformly pro-science. Peterson and Shapiro are… Have expressed sympathy for climate skepticism, they don’t really think that the earth is warming. And Shapiro at least, I haven’t dug up everyone’s bio here, but I know that Ben Shapiro has been sympathetic to intelligent design as opposed to ordinary Darwinian evolution, so it’s not obviously a pro-science group of people. However, okay, I’m just mentioning these ’cause I think that they’re important issues, but what I wanna get at for this particular discussion is, the Reddit description of what the IDW is, is only about methodology, it does not mention the substantive beliefs that these people have. 1:05:05 SC: It just says we’re open to free discourse, rational open-minded good faith discussions. But about what? And what are the positions that they’re advocating in these good faith discussions? The members of the IDW seemed to be very insistent that they are not politically homogeneous, that they have a diversity of viewpoints within their groups, there are conservatives, there are liberals what have you, they just want to advocate for free speech. But the reality is that they actually do agree on some substantive issues. I think that a lot of people who really are dedicated to the traditional left-right dichotomy, have tried to shoe horn the IDW into conservativism, or even a gateway to the alt-right, I think that’s kind of a waste of time. 1:05:53 SC: I’m not that interested in who is a gateway to what, if you disagree with somebody, then disagree with what they actually say, don’t disagree with them because they might lead someone to follow someone even more extreme. If someone says true things, and then for whatever reason that leads to more extremism down the road, the things they’re saying are still true. So, the extent which I care about what the IDW says, is what they are actually saying, not where they might lead. 1:06:20 SC: And I agree that it’s not really easy to put them on a conservative liberal spectrum fully. Because there is a diversity of opinions but again, they agree about some things, the things they disagree about are things like abortion rights or healthcare or climate change. So there they are literally on the filling the spectrum of political ideas. What they agree about… Well, let’s look at the New York Times. There’s this famous article by Bari Weiss, that introduced the IDW to the world where she mentioned certain things they agree about including there are fundamental biological differences between men and women and identity politics is a toxic ideology that is tearing American society apart. 1:07:02 SC: And probably even though he doesn’t say it quite there in that paragraph, they would include the idea that there could be racial differences in IQ that separates let’s say blacks from whites or Asians. These are the kinds of ideas that the IDW, wants out there in the public sphere being talked about. So not including that the fact that they don’t want to mention that in certain definitions of who they are is another sort of red flag, in my mind. I think that you should be candid about the beliefs that you have and want to spread. There’s certain ideas, you will not find being promulgated in IDW discussions. You will not find good faith dialogue saying, “Well maybe we should all become intersectional feminists or maybe we should support Sharia law courts here in the United States.” 1:07:53 SC: What they agree on, there are cultural debates here in the United States, I’ll include Canada because Jordan Peterson, is Canadian. It might very well include other places in the world, but I personally am just not familiar enough with what the cultural divides are in those places to opine about that. Here in the US, we have certain cultural disagreements. There is the idea on the part of the IDW, that one side of those ongoing cultural debates is being repressive, is being closed-minded to the discussion of ideas, is shutting down debate. And the side that they’re accusing of doing that is the progressive social justice side. 1:08:35 SC: So while they may disagree on abortion or healthcare, they agree that there is a threat to free speech and open dialogue coming from the left. That is why it is sort of natural for some people to dub them conservative, even if though they themselves wouldn’t like that. So that’s fine, intellectually it’s fine to disagree with leftist on certain things. They might be right, it’s a little worrisome, they don’t wanna be candid about that substantive set of beliefs, but it’s certainly okay to have substantive opinions. But let’s think about what these substantive opinions are actually about what they’re actually saying. For one thing they’re not that naughty, the idea there are fundamental biological differences between men and women, you would have to work really, really hard to find people who disagreed with that statement. 1:09:25 SC: There are implications of that statement that people might disagree with, but they’re not putting those implications front and center, they’re not admitting to those, they wanna have this incredibly banal statement about there are biological differences between men and women, which is not really very controversial in most quarters. But if you think about what these statements are the existence of these differences and then the implications that they tease out from them between men and women, different races, people who might qualify as transgendered or lesbian, gay, queer those kinds of people. You think about what all these opinions are saying these are not cutting edge scientific discoveries, the idea that there are differences between men and women. These are Archie Bunker opinions. 1:10:09 SC: These are opinions that your racist uncle at Thanksgiving would have no trouble endorsing. These are just sort of standard issue conservative opinions, about the natural differences between different groups of people. That doesn’t mean they’re wrong, that doesn’t mean they’re incorrect, just because these opinions have been around for thousands of years. They could still be right even though they’ve been around for thousands of years, that often happens. But the fact that they might be cast as controversial, in this context, despite the fact that many people do hold them suggest we should think about them carefully. Suggest that we should say, “Well, not only what is the evidence for or against this opinion?” But why is it that certain people hold these opinions? Why is it that other people have become suspicious of these opinions, what is the history of this?  1:10:58 SC: And that’s because when we’re trying to think about being rational, we’re getting into the relationship between rationality and morality, we have to admit that we have opinions, we have histories, we have pre-existing ideas in our head. I like to think about being rational, and making choices about what propositions to believe in as a Bayesian, which is a fancy way of saying, you say that for all the propositions about the world you could imagine you assign some probability that they are true. And if you do that before you go out there and look at the world you call these your prior probabilities. 1:11:35 SC: And of course you never do that, before you go out there and look in the world, you haven’t assigned any priors at all. All of us look at the world before we ever hear about Bayesian reasoning, so really what we’re thinking about is before you make extra observations of the world you try to explicitly state what your beliefs about the world are. You have background information about your experience in life, about how you grew up, about what you’ve learned. And in that listing of your priors you better keep track of the fact that you have biases. We’re all bundles of biases. If Neuroscience and Psychology have taught us anything, we are not perfect reasoning machines, we can strive to be rational, we can aspire to get there to have our cognitive capacities have a stronger influence over how we live our lives and make choices and assign credences to propositions. But in the real world, there’s all sorts of ways in which we fall short at being perfectly rational. 1:12:33 SC: Not only do we have biases that affect our beliefs, but also in what we pay attention to in the world, what we care about, what we value. And it’s not that we should strive to get rid of our biases entirely. We move toward that, but we’ll never get there, okay? We will never not have biases. That’s just not psychologically or neuro-scientifically possible. If you read Daniel Kahneman’s book, Thinking Fast and Slow, it’s a good framework for thinking about these things. System 2 is our rational cognitive capacities. System 1 in his classification is all of our underlying heuristics and short cuts and intuitive ways of thinking about the world, and System 1 is the boss, really. Like System 2 thinks it’s in charge, but it’s analogized to the tiny little person riding an elephant, you know? The tiny little person thinks they’re in charge, but the elephant is doing all the work here, and that’s our heuristics, our biases. 1:13:30 SC: We’re not gonna get rid of them. What we can do is work to be aware of them, to take them into consideration, and I think that’s the primary message I wanna get at here in this particular discussion, as I started to say, maybe I didn’t finish saying it, I don’t care that much about the intellectual dark web as such. I am using them as an example, as a test case, for thinking about these issues of social justice, political correctness and so forth. None of this is new. When I was in college in the 1980s, people were complaining about political correctness. It’s like sex, right? Every new generation thinks it invented these ideas, but they’ve been around for a very, very, very long time. 1:14:11 SC: And so I think that the… What we wanna get at here is how we can best deploy rationality in a world where we recognize we are not perfectly rational. We want to be moral, we wanna be good people, we want to use the force of reason to help us decide what is right and what is wrong. We can never forget that the force of reason is imperfect in real actual human beings. So the intellectual dark web has put the word “intellectual” into their title. I think that’s good. I’m in favor of the word intellectual. I’m not gonna begrudge them, the ability to name themselves whatever they want. It’s important, but that word matters to me, okay? The word intellectual has power and it should be taken seriously. Intellectual doesn’t mean intelligent, it doesn’t mean knowledgeable, it doesn’t mean you’re an academic or a professor or anything like that, what it means to be an intellectual is that you hold the truth as the highest value, that you will work towards being correct forgetting about all of the other influences, all the other motivations, all the other biases you might have. 1:15:19 SC: Whatever truth you find out, you will stick up for regardless of what other implications there are. That, in my mind, is really what it means to be an intellectual even if those truths are inconvenient, uncomfortable, and so forth. The opposite of intellectual isn’t a stupid person, a dumb person, an uneducated person. The opposite of an intellectual is a flack, an ass kisser, a toadie, someone who makes up arguments to support a pre-existing position regardless of whether the evidence and rationality actually leads them there. A typical person who is not an intellectual might be an apologist for power, for money, for influence, people who are deploying their forces of persuasion for some purpose other than finding the truth. Telling people what they want to hear is the opposite of being an intellectual, and included in the list of people is of course yourself. Telling yourself what you want to hear is not what an intellectual should be doing. 1:16:23 SC: And we recognize this, for example, in science. In science, we know that this striving for getting at the truth is a constant battle against our biases, right? That’s why we invent blind analyses, double-blind studies, and so forth. If you heard my podcast with Kip Thorne, you know about the example of LIGO, the Gravitational-Wave Observatory, where they were so afraid of giving in to the temptation to find something even if it wasn’t there, that they instituted the system where they would inject fake signals into the data and not tell anybody. There was like a tiny group of people, a committee within the huge collaboration, that was in charge of injecting fake signals into the data with the idea being that the rest of the collaboration wouldn’t know whether that signal was fake or a real discovery out there in the sky and their job would be to take it seriously, to analyze it as if it were completely real. And then only at the end would it be revealed, “Oh, no, we just faked you.” 1:17:21 SC: And the idea is that you need to be on guard against fooling yourself. They wanted to make sure that they would be able to tell the difference between something that really happened and something that they were just patting themselves on the back into thinking actually happened. So I wanna extend this practice of science, the practice of knowing perfectly well, that we human beings are not rational and have biases and like to give into them and therefore should make extraordinary measures to safeguard against doing that, and I wanna extend it to morality and to rationality more generally. I think it is an important… A very important aspect of being a rational person. 1:18:01 SC: So the intellectual dark web, if you think about what is these substantive positions that they are supporting, we live in a world where there are certain cultural fault lines, okay, where certain groups have been picked on historically, certain other groups have been dominant, certain groups have been oppressed, certain groups have been powerful. And when it comes to these cultural fault lines, the IDW inevitably ends up supporting the group which here in the US or North America, has been historically dominant, the powerful, the ruling group. They are acting as apologists for the established order of things. They want to say that the unequal representation, for example, or at least they want to let’s say… Let’s be try to be more fair. They want to argue for the possibility that we should at least consider that things like the unequal representation of blacks and whites, men and women, gays and straights, and so forth, in various positions of power and influence and wealth in the United States is not a result of bias or discrimination. It’s just a reflection of the underlying natural order of things, an unbiased playing out to people’s talents and inclinations. That is the general impression that they want to either give or at least open to the… Be open to the possibility of. 1:19:23 SC: So if you think about that claim, if you think about the claim that the difference between the number of men and women in science, or in the United States Senate, or in positions of CEOs, or on the Forbes 500, I don’t know, what is the Forbes list? 400 people, 500 people, billionaires, the richest people in the United States? They’re not equal men and women, they don’t reflect the actual percentage of men and women in the population, or blacks and whites, etcetera. So do you really want to claim that this is just how things should be? It’s not actually a result of of bias and discrimination. That’s a very remarkable claim, if you want to state it quite that boldly. We’ve clearly had bias and discrimination in our society for a very long time, and it hasn’t gone away. In my mind, it’s pretty clear that it’s still out there. It’s clear that we have made progress. There are people whose ancestors not too long ago were slaves here in the United States, and there are still effects of that, but it’s much more recent than that. When I was born in 1966, okay, so not that long ago, within my lifetime, women were not allowed to apply to go to college at places like Princeton, Yale, Georgetown, the University of Virginia, okay, a giant public school. 1:20:42 SC: The idea that women should go to these places just wasn’t countenanced, blacks were openly discriminated against in countless ways. If you’re familiar with the history of how blacks were discriminated against long after slavery was officially eliminated, you should read on the history of red lining, the idea of drawing lines around certain areas of certain cities where blacks were concentrated, and refusing to give housing loans or mortgages to anyone who wanted to buy a house in those areas. This was an enormously influential policy, not an official policy written down in laws, at least not in those places, but an enormously influential practice, I should say, that prevented African-American families and communities from accumulating wealth and owning their own houses and lands for a very long time. It was officially declared illegal in 1968 with the Fair Housing Act. But of course it kept on going, unofficially, for a long time. There’s a study in the 1980s where it was much easier for poor white families in Atlanta, Georgia, to get a mortgage loan than for middle income or high income black families in Atlanta. 1:21:53 SC: And the results of this have been pretty astonishing. And 2009 is the most recent year I could find numbers for the wealth, not the income which is sort of the amount of money you make per year, but the wealth, so the total of your assets minus your debts. The wealth of a median white family in the United States is over $100,000, whereas the wealth of a median black family is under $6000. There’s an enormous wealth gap between whites and blacks in the United States. So the idea that in situations where very recently there was official discrimination, and still today there are the lingering effects of discrimination and bias in our society. The idea that somehow these effects don’t play a huge role in deciding who gets what job, who is promoted to what position, who is paid attention to, who we listen to. That seems wildly unlikely to me. We all know about how recently gay marriage was finally accepted here in the United States. It would be very, very, very strange indeed to think that the attitudes that led to these discriminatory policies, suddenly evaporated when the policies themselves were finally overturned. 1:23:07 SC: Presumably there were reasons why we had these policies, people had beliefs that made these policies seem like the right thing to do, and even if you change the law, the beliefs don’t necessarily change, even if they change with some people they don’t change with others. So to me, as a good Bayesian, thinking about what my biases are and what society’s biases probably are, it’s much more sensible to believe that our society is suffused with discriminatory ideas, in ways both obvious and subtle. So as rational people, it should be our job to accept that, to face up to that reality, and to keep as much vigilance as we can, to make sure that the effects of this discrimination and the underlying attitudes that led to this discrimination, don’t distort the world we live in, we want to live up to the ideals of the enlightenment. People who were… Famously people who were the enlightenment thinkers, who found the enlightenment, didn’t themselves always live up to the ideals of the enlightenment. Thomas Jefferson owned slaves and raped one of his slaves. Our actual people in the past fall short of their own self-promulgated ideals. But we can try to do better, we can try to be as close to those ideals as we can. 1:24:24 SC: The enlightenment teaches us that we are all created equal, and we live in a world where we are not all treated equal. So there’s a mismatch and we should fight against that. The example of such a mismatch that I’m most familiar with, and so I talk about it a lot, is Women in Science. This has flared up as an issue over the last year or two. There’s a famous example where the physicist Alessandro Strumia gave a talk at a conference, that he got in hot water for giving. So this… And it has become, as you might expect, especially on the internet, a hot button issue, where people have convinced themselves Strumia is a martyr for the cause, and so forth. If I… So Strumia’s point was, roughly speaking, that women are underrepresented in science because women on average don’t have as much talent or interest in doing science as men do, that was his point. Now, why was he even giving a talk about that at a conference on women in science? He wasn’t invited to give the talk, he invited himself. He asked to give that talk and when asked what he was gonna talk about, he lied, he said he was gonna talk about some details of bibliographical statistics, okay. 1:25:35 SC: That was part of his talk, but that was not what his talk was about. What he meant by that was, he basically is ranking the value of individual physicist by how many citations they get, by how often people would cite their papers in other… In their own papers. And basically, it’s almost absurd. You couldn’t… If you wanted to sort of embarrass the people who actually believe that women are not discriminated against, you would come up with a hero like Alessandro Strumia, it turns out in the middle of the talk, you begin to realize his real motivation for giving this talk is that he applied for a job and he didn’t get it and a woman got it, and he became convinced that the forces of political correctness were flooding the market with unqualified women at the expense of much more qualified men. 1:26:23 SC: And there are people who believe this. There are people who believe it at different levels of explicitness. And I just wanna bring up the absurdity of this idea. There’s not a lot of women in physics. Roughly speaking, the number of people who get PhDs who are women is 10%, that seems to be the number that it’s been for a few years now. I was a host for a Physics Colloquium at Caltech recently, and I looked at the audience for the talk, there were about 80 people in the audience, and three of them were women. And on my floor of the building in Caltech where the theoretical physics group is held, theoretical high energy physics group I should say, there’s roughly eight or 10 faculty, 10 or 12 postdocs, 20 or 30 graduate students. And for several years in a row, there were zero women. Zero women among faculty, postdocs, graduate students all in total in the theoretical high energy group at Caltech. So whatever the reason for this is, and Caltech is not completely representative and there are fluctuations, ’cause the numbers are small, but the idea that the forces of political correctness are flooding theoretical physics with unqualified women is absurd on the face of it, ’cause the women just aren’t there, it’s just not working, it’s a terrible way to flood the field, if that’s what you’re trying to do. 1:27:49 SC: If you think about it, the idea that it’s really men who have a bad deal in physics, not women is exactly like global warming denialism, like climate denialism. So what do I mean by that? So, in both cases, in climate denialism and in men are the real victims here denialism in science, there’s a phenomenon that is perfectly obvious. In climate, the perfectly obvious phenomenon is the average temperature of the Earth is increasing. The Earth is getting warmer. In science, it is that most scientists are men, they’re not women, it’s nowhere close to 50/50. And also, then there’s a pretty straightforward explanation for that phenomenon, in the case of the climate, it’s that we are dumping greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. Carbon dioxide is shooting up, and if you look at the curves, it looks just like the curve of temperature shooting up. For women in science, women have been discriminated against. They weren’t allowed to go to college [chuckle] for many years. And those biases and those discriminatory assumptions that lay in the background haven’t completely evaporated. 1:28:53 SC: But in addition to the phenomenon and the obvious explanation, there are two other factors at work. Number one, there are complications in the explanation that there is a simple explanation in both cases, but there’s also complicating factors. Life is hard sometimes, things are rarely very simple. For the atmosphere, sure, we’re putting carbon dioxide into it, but there’s other things going on. There’s ice sheets, and permafrost, and there’s the ocean versus the land, and there’s all sorts of… There’s sun spots, who knows? For women in science, there are forces that are trying to increase the representation of women in science, there’s women’s own interests in being a scientist or not being a scientist, there’s having children, there’s a million other complicating factors. Okay. And number two, there is a political motivation. 1:29:41 SC: There is a reason to resist the obvious explanation. In the case of climate, there is both this entrepreneurial capitalistic motivation to say, “No, I wanna keep burning fossil fuels, ’cause this makes me rich,” and this is complicated for other reasons, if you remember my podcast with Naomi Oreskes, she explained how libertarian politics and the fight against the Soviet Union in the 1980s really led to some people to resist the scientific consensus on global warming. And there’s a political motivation for women in science also, there are men, like Alessandro Strumia, who don’t want to admit that maybe women are discriminated against. They think of themselves as perfectly unbiased, that’s perfectly fair in these things. So the complications, if you look into it, if you dig into the science carefully for global warming or for women in science, the complications of the underlying explanation don’t change the underlying explanations, when you do it a little bit beyond the most naive. It turns out that, sure, there’s a simple explanation for global warming, but there’s also more complicated things you can do and the explanation still works. 1:30:54 SC: The world is still getting warmer, it’s still a bad thing. We should still stop putting greenhouse gases into the environment. For women in science, yes, there’s many complicated factors. They wanna have kids, family leave, maybe at very young ages, they become less interested in science, but the discrimination is still there, and it is keeping women out of science in very, very large numbers. But if you’re ideologically motivated to deny the reality, you can leverage those complications. You can throw up a cloud of disinformation, you can talk about all sorts of other things going on, and this is a well-known technique in propaganda. If you have an audience that is sympathetic to a certain point of view, even if that point of view is not true, you can give them a reason for accepting that point of view just by muddying the waters, just by saying all sorts of different things and giving them sort of a license to say, “Well, we don’t really know.” This is the kind of thing that Jordan Peterson would say about climate change. 1:31:55 SC: “Well, we don’t really know. There’s a lot of complicated things, we shouldn’t jump to conclusions.” And you see this kind of thing at work in Strumia’s talk, you can see the slides for his talk online. There’s one that is especially hilarious where he is comparing the career number of citations from women physicists and men physicists. And so he plots a number of citations you have per year, five years after your PhD, 10 years after your PhD, 15 years, etcetera. And you can see very clearly that men just keep going up and up and up, and the women sort of go up at a much lower rate. They seem to be accumulating fewer citations over time. 1:32:33 SC: Now, there’s a [chuckle] very good argument to be made that total number of citations is not an un-mediated measure of scientific quality. It begs the question of whether or not the women are being discriminated against by getting less citations, but let’s put that aside. The hilarious thing is that he completely ignored the fact that women leave science. He was comparing men who stayed in physics for 50 years to women who had done physics for five or 10 years and then left the field. It is completely unsurprising that their total number of those citations over time are very different, ’cause they spend a lot of very different time writing papers. 1:33:13 SC: That’s not to say that the underlying conclusion is not true, but the analysis is woefully, hilariously inadequate. And it comes about because he knew what answer he wanted to get, and he got it and then he stopped thinking about it. That’s the kind of thing that can happen when you’re not an intellectual, when you’re not devoted to the truth, when you have an answer you want to get, you sort of get there and then you stop thinking anymore. The reality is that discrimination is real, against women, against blacks, in a million different ways. There’s discrimination in Physics, as well as elsewhere in the world. That’s what you can test for, and every test reveals the same basic answer, that biases are real, they exist. This is why concert musicians have developed a system where if you wanna audition for the orchestra you do so behind a curtain, so the people who are listening to you are listening to your music, not looking to see whether you are male or female. Because the test show that there was a huge bias in favor of male musicians. 1:34:15 SC: There are obviously examples of harassment within Physics, and harassment is sort of an extreme example of something that happens all over the place, right? Professors commenting on women’s appearance, students and as well as other faculty colleagues. I personally see this all the time. I cannot possibly imagine how someone could be in the physics community, have their eyes even slightly open, and not see all of the million ways in which women’s worth is questioned as a scientist. It is just a constant stream of very, very subtle questioning like, “Do you really belong here?” kinds of things. And you can say, “Well, if you wanna be a scientist you should suck it up, you should put up with all those little people questioning your worth,” but it’s unbalanced. If people need to suck it up, that’s fine, but there’s no reason why women need to suck it up more than men. That’s exactly the example of discrimination, it’s death by 1000 cuts, not necessarily actively being pushed out. 1:35:21 SC: And it’s not because… It’s not a simple relationship between math ability and whether you become a physics professor, there are more women in mathematics than there are in theoretical physics. Girls get better grades in math classes than boys do, okay. Girls don’t do as well on standardized tests of mathematics as boys do, past a certain age, very early age it’s similar, later on it becomes different. So the question is, is doing math in the real world more like getting a grade in a class or more like taking a multiple choice test? I think you could make a case that it’s more like getting a grade in a class. All of this influence, all of this questioning that women really don’t belong in this field, it starts very, very young. My niece, once we went to Christmas, we gave my niece and my nephew both Christmas presents, my niece who was like, I don’t know, eight years old, 10 years old at the time, she opens her Christmas presents, and it was a little Erector set to build an electric car. Just a tiny little thing, you built an electric car, there’s little battery in it, and you made it go. And she opens and she looks at it, she’s very young, and she looks at us and says, “Oh, I think there was a mistake. This is for my brother.” 1:36:38 SC: And we said, “No, no, it’s really not for your brother, it’s for you,” and you could see her struggling with this idea, “I don’t get presents like this,” right? And it’s not because she’s actively discriminated against, it’s not because my brother and his family were trying to steer her away from science or engineering or anything like that, it’s just ’cause there are supposition about what girls want versus what boys want. And the hilarious upshot of this story is that half an hour later, she had built that car and it was zooming around the floor and she was loving it. She had never been able to play with something like this before. We just sort of start when children are born, assuming that they like certain things, don’t like other things. And for some girls it wouldn’t work, some girls would be completely not interested in cars, and that’s perfectly okay. But if we don’t give them the chance, we’ll never know. So what I’m doing here in this discussion, I know that I went on extra long about that, because it is very close to my heart. And I’m focusing on the existence of the discrimination. The existence of these thousand mild ways, ways both mild and strong, that women are nudged out of science and the effect that it has on them. 1:37:49 SC: And I’m not having a discussion about what the inherent abilities are, given to us by biology whether we are men or women. That is the subject that the people who don’t believe in discrimination tend to prefer to focus on. And the reason why I’m not focusing on it is ’cause who cares? I really, it’s… So there’s this idea that if I don’t want there to be discrimination I must be denying the reality of biological differences. That’s not it. It’s that I don’t care about biological differences. It is certainly true to anyone who has actually met both men and women, that the women who are good at math and physics are better at it than the average man at math and physics, right? Therefore, knowing that someone is male or female, should have absolutely no influence on how you judge them as a mathematician or physicist or other forms of scientist, you should judge how they actually are as an individual. It may be the case that there is a difference between girls and boys, intrinsically in different kinds of ability. 1:38:57 SC: It may be that there’s not any actual intrinsic difference. It’s very, very hard to know that because of course the moment you’re born you start being treated differently depending on whether you are a boy or a girl, but it doesn’t matter because discrimination is bad regardless. If there is a difference between men and women in intrinsic ability, and women are also discriminated against, just for being women, we should work to get rid of that discrimination. If there is not a difference between men and women at intrinsic ability, and there is discrimination, we should also work to get rid of that discrimination. That is what matters, the people who concentrate on the possible existence of intrinsic differences in ability, between men and women based on standardized tests. 1:39:42 SC: These are generally not people who have a professional interest in genetics or psychology or anything like that. Sometimes they are, but there’s a lot of people who are not in that camp, who nevertheless seem fascinated by this particular topic. The only reason they are, is because they are being apologist for the current system. They are being apologists for the idea that there is no evidence for discrimination because they wanna say, I can map the existence of intrinsic ability onto the number of Nobel Prize winners and the number of faculty members, etcetera. But that’s an irrelevant argument if there’s a separate way of looking and asking, is their discrimination out there in the world? Anyone who is working in the sciences or who studies science, knows that there is discrimination out there and that’s bad and that’s what matters. 1:40:32 SC: And of course there are similar things to be said about race, about sexual identity and so forth. There’s a number of ways in which discrimination is still real. We want to be better people but we’re not people yet. We’re not perfect people, we probably never will be perfect people, we need to keep working on it. And you know, look, discrimination and things like that, they don’t necessarily come out of evil or bad impulses. I’ve known the sweetest people who would be horrified at the idea that they were in any way sexist or racist, who never the less exhibited ideas, predilections, that would be obviously by an outside observer labeled as sexist or racist. And those secret attitudes, those parts of you that you don’t always bring up to the surface and question, can absolutely affect how you go through your life. But I don’t think it’s evil or even necessarily a moral miscalibration. 1:41:32 SC: And this finally gets us back to this issue of the interplay between ethics and morals and rationality and reason. If you want to follow the advice of the intellectual dark web, you should be rational, you should be reasonable. Ben Shapiro likes to say, “Facts don’t care about your feelings.” And this is very, very true. But we all have feelings, whether you like it or not, we should admit that we have feelings. Sometimes you gotta dig deep to get to the ultimate facts, confronting feelings that you might not want to admit are there inside you. There is this temptation, as I said, to come to the conclusion you like and then stop. Rationality is often used for purposes of rationalization, of taking… Rationality should be, you start with the data and you work to the conclusion. Rationalization is, you start with the conclusion you like and then you go backwards and construct a seemingly rational justification for it. 1:42:27 SC: We are all subject to this. I’m not trying to pick on people who I disagree with politically. I’m subjected to this. I have racist and sexist parts of my upbringing that are still there. How in the world could I not? We live in a racist and sexist society. There’s overwhelming evidence for that. I can try to be better, I don’t want to be racist or sexist. But if I were to just simply say, if I were Stephen Colbert in his character of The Colbert Report and saying, “I don’t see race, I think that you’re a young Asian woman.” That’s a joke because it can’t be true. We should admit that we are human beings, bundles of impulses and heuristics and system one, chattering away beneath the surface, and be open to the possibility that that affects our behavior. 1:43:14 SC: Rationality is instrumental. It finds conclusions from whatever inputs it gets. But we can ask ourselves, even if we are perfectly rational, where do the inputs come from? What facts about the world do we choose to look at? So if I am concerned that maybe women are getting unfair advantages, it’s very easy for me to see certain fellowships or opportunities for women in particular that men don’t have. I can see that hiring committees, faculty hiring committees go out of their way to find female candidates. And that is bright and vivid to me and makes me mad and makes me feel there’s injustice in the world. And I can just not notice all of the ways in which women are nudged away from science throughout their entire lives, from when they’re born, through elementary school, through high school, through undergraduate, through graduate school and beyond. And so to me, I’m being rational when I say like, “Look, this is very unfair that there’s this fellowship that only women can get or there’s this job that this woman got.” And it’s because of the garbage in garbage out principle. I didn’t have, I didn’t take into account all of the facts of the real world, but the facts I chose to take into account, I reasoned with in some way. 1:44:36 SC: So you can see a conservative speaker invited to a college who is being heckled or even being deplatformed, not allowed to give a talk at that college. And you cannot see the reality of racism or sexism or homophobia or transphobia that affects the lives of students in these situations. So in my opinion, people stifling speech in the name of fighting racism is bad. I am not in favor of that. I’m very much in favor of a wide variety of speech about all sorts of things. Even the worst people should be able to talk. If there’s a group on campus that wants to invite a speaker, I think that they should always be allowed to invite that speaker, no matter how bad the person is. And some people disagree with me about this. Some people think that certain people are beyond the pale, they should not be allowed to be invited, not just campus-wide, but even by any group on campus. So I disagree with them and I’m happy to had that conversation with them. 1:45:37 SC: In my mind, this problem of racist speakers being invited to campus or not being invited to campus is not anywhere near as bad as the problem of racism. It’s almost absurd to try to balance the effect of racism on the lives of black people in the United States versus the problem of this particular speaker didn’t get to give a talk because they were considered to be racist. They’re both problems, but they’re not problems at equal magnitude in my mind. And I know that what some people will say to that kind of argument is, “I can choose… There’s many bad things going on out there in the world. I get the right to choose which bad things I’m gonna focus on, right? I can’t solve all the problems of the world. Some problems are more important to me than others.” I think that’s a true statement, but there’s a limit to how far that reasoning goes when the problems we’re talking about are closely related. 1:46:36 SC: The idea I have in mind is if you go to a restaurant and you order soup and it’s supposed to be hot and you get it cold. So this is a traditional setup for complaining to your waiter. You say, “Waiter, my soup is cold. It’s supposed to be hot.” Now if the waiter were to say to you, “How dare you worry about something so trivial as cold soup when global climate change is destroying our environment.” That’ll be an absurd response on the part of your waiter, right? I mean, it’s true, climate change is a much bigger problem than the temperature of your soup, but it’s a problem from a completely different area. The waiter has no right to say like, “You should spend exactly as much time complaining about problems in proportional to how bad they are.” That’s not a good way to go through life. But if the waiter said, “How dare you worry about something so trivial as the temperature of your soup when the kitchen is obviously on fire and we’re evacuating the restaurant.” In that case, the waiter is correct and that’s because that particular issue, the kitchen being on fire, is closely related to the situation going on in the restaurant right then. 1:47:39 SC: So sure, you can say, “Well, I care about free speech, not about racism.” But when free speech and racism intersect, it makes sense to balance the relative importance of these different problems. I think that fighting racism is a much bigger problem than getting speakers on campus even if they are both problems. For many people, in our culture, as much as we don’t want to admit it, the metaphorical kitchen is on fire, the restaurant is burning down. They live a life where there’s just a huge number of ways in which they are not treated equally, not because of who they are as a person, but because of what group they belong to. That doesn’t mean that such people are right about everything or that their view of the world is intrinsically correct, but it offers a perspective that other people might not have. When you do not have to put up with certain forms of discrimination, it’s hard to put yourself into the mindset, into the world, into the life of someone who does. 1:48:45 SC: I had this discussion with Paul Bloom on the podcast. And Paul wrote an interesting, provocative book about being against empathy. And his argument was, “We tend to empathize with people like ourselves. And by doing that, empathy gets in the way of being rational.” Again, this morality and rationality intersection. And he argued that, “If we were simply rational, then we could be moral, we could be better people without trying to put ourselves in the situations that other people are facing without being empathetic.” I think there’s a huge mistake in that analysis. Because clearly, if you do restrict your empathy to people like yourself, then yes, then I agree with them. Then you can in fact be irrational about your moral conclusions because you’re not taking into consideration the perspectives of other people. But my solution to it is we need more empathy, not less. We need to train our empathy to really let us understand where other people are coming from, especially when people have very, very different life situations than we do. 1:49:54 SC: I’m not a believer that someone with a different life situation than me has magical insight that I must sort of instantly accept when they offer it. But I do, as an enlightenment thinker, as someone who believes that all knowledge is provisional and fallible and subject to updating, I realize that they know something I don’t and I should be able to listen to them and learn something. That’s the important thing. It’s not accepting what black people say about racism just because they’re black, it’s accepting that they know something about racism that I don’t because they’re black, because they’ve lived a different experience. I should try to listen to what they have to say. When I do my best to accept what they have to say, then I should reason by myself, then I should do the best I can to reach a correct conclusion. But I have to be open to those experiences, to those voices, to those different ways of living in the world. 1:50:48 SC: And I even think there should be empathy for privileged straight white men. I’m in favor of that. The word privilege has become very charged obviously. We talk about male privilege, about white privilege and so forth. And it rubs some people the wrong way and I get it why it rubs people the wrong way. I also get why it’s used and I think it’s a useful concept. But if you are a straight white man and you’re accused of having white privilege for example, you can instantly start thinking to yourself, “Well, I’m not privileged. My life was tough. I earned what I got.” Maybe you are poor, maybe you were just like not that socially adept when you were young. Maybe you faced a great tragedy, your parents died or something like that. There’s a million ways in which your individual life may be a struggle, even though you were labeled as having white privilege or male privilege or something like that. 1:51:39 SC: But privilege doesn’t mean that you had an easy life, that’s not what the word means in this particular context. What it means is that there are obstacles that you don’t face simply because of your membership in certain groups. It doesn’t mean you don’t face other obstacles. But guess what? People who are black or gay or transgender or whatever, they can also face the obstacles of being poor, being socially awkward, having family tragedies and what have you. And they also can face things like racism and misogyny and transphobia, which you don’t have to if you were a straight white person. The example that comes to mind since I always conceptualize difficult problems in terms of basketball analogies. Recently, the Toronto Raptors won the NBA championship in a game in Oakland over the Golden State Warriors, and Masai Ujiri, who is the General Manager of the Toronto Raptors. So he’s the guy who chooses which players to trade for and to draft and to sign. So he’s basically the boss of the basketball team. 1:52:42 SC: And when they won the game, to finally win the championship, game six, he rushed out of the court to join the celebration and he was held back by a police officer. And the police officer originally claimed that Ujiri actually had punched him. But then guess what? Of course, it’s the NBA Championship and they just won and there’s a million cameras and videos around. There’s no punching involved as it was shown. So the police officer then said, “Well, he didn’t have his credential.” Guess what? He was carrying his credential in his hand. So Ujiri was wearing a suit. He was carrying his credential in his hand. He was the general manager of the basketball team that had just won the NBA title. And when he tried to join the celebration, he was stopped by a police officer. 1:53:29 SC: Now maybe this would have happened were he white, but he wasn’t white and it happened. And I think that by any objective way of measuring the probabilities here, the chances that would have happened, had he been a white businessman looking general manager are much lower. That’s an example of privilege, that there’s a different way of looking at people. And individual cases are always a little problematic to lean on because you never know. Maybe in this particular example, the officer had instructions that would have led him to do the same thing for anyone of any race or ethnicity. I don’t know that for sure. What you know is that there’s an accumulated effect of many, many, many examples of things like that of how people are treated differently because of their skin color in the United States. So that’s a real kind of privilege that white people have. It doesn’t mean your life was easy, it means you had a different life experience. 1:54:27 SC: Okay. So where are we? Let’s bring this back to this original question of how to be a good person, how to act morally in the world. And let me use an example from Sam Harris. It sounds like I’m picking on Sam Harris. I don’t mean to do that. I talk about Sam a lot because he’s worth engaging with. I think that he’s more interesting. He has more interesting things to say to me than some of his intellectual dark web compatriots. His podcast for example was certainly a role model for mine. Inspiration for thinking that you could have long conversations about intellectual topics and people would be interested in listening to it. There’s not a lot of evidence for that in the world and he certainly provided some. So when I engage with him, it’s because I think it’s worth trying to engage in constructive disagreement. 1:55:12 SC: So there was a time on his podcast, I think it was with Jordan Peterson probably was given the subject. The subject was pronouns being used by transgender people. A lot of transgender people want to be referred to by very specific pronouns that they care about. Sometimes they would wanna choose pronouns from the existing English language; he, she, so forth. Other times, they prefer made-up words because they’re in a different situation than cisgender people would find themselves. And this is an ongoing controversy about how we should deal with this. So Sam put forward his opinion that he thought that people requesting to him that he use certain pronouns to refer to them, he was not in favor of that because he thought it’s a positive imposition on asking him to do something. Not just asking him to not do something bad, but asking him to do something actively good. It takes energy. And if we just extrapolate, there’s an infinite number of things that I could be asked to do and that’s not something he thinks is quite fair. 1:56:19 SC: So my attitude towards this is, yeah, yeah, it is asking you to do something positively. It would take energy. Making the world a better place might very well require effort, require an exertion of energy, even on the part of people who have not themselves made the world the worst place. I think that that’s just a very plausible thing. The argument that there could be an infinite number of things you were asked to do is just kind of silly. There’s not an infinite number of things you’re asked to do. You’re asked to do the things that makes the world a better place, that makes it more fair, that lets people be treated how they want to be treated. People who are not transgender, typically, have no trouble at all getting referred to by the pronouns they prefer. This automatically happens for them. People who are transgender have to work at it and that is an imbalance between the life experiences of those different people. 1:57:16 SC: In my mind, and again, maybe this comes down to empathy, transgender people have to put up with a lot. They are born and grow up into this realization that they don’t conform to what the world expects of them. They’re not what the society around them wants them and believes them to be, and they’re constantly reminded of that. That is a tough way to grow up, or even if you find out about it later in life, a tough way to exist. It can result in bullying, ostracism. You could be ostracized from your family or friends. You can become depressed, sometimes it leads to suicide. It’s not an easy way and there’s lot of courage associated with being able to openly live that way. 1:58:00 SC: So if I learned that I can make someone like that’s life easier simply by referring to them using the words that they prefer to be referred by, that sounds to me like the very least I can do. There’s not that many ways in which I can clearly and obviously make the world a happier, better place. That is one of them. So I find it very easy to do that. I mean, not easy to necessarily know what someone’s preferred pronouns are. That’s a sticky social situation that we’re still working at. But if someone tells me what they are, I will do everything I can to try to use them. And that can be tricky too, because again, system one is in charge here. How we refer to people is often unconscious and we have to sort of consciously override. And it can be work, I get that. To me, I think it’s work very well worth doing. I think that a huge part of being moral, being a good person in the version of morality that I construct as a constructivist is breaking out of our biases, our perspectives. 1:59:04 SC: We should always start by thinking, “I’m probably a little bit biased.” That’s the safest way to go through life because then you’re open through to how that manifests. And if you find, “Oh, actually it’s not really manifesting, I’m behaving in a very non-biased way.” Good for you. To me, this is the enlightenment at work. This is treating people with equal dignity, cosmopolitanism, openness to new experience, being able to admit that our beliefs, our perspectives might not be complete, might not be right. We can always do better. Be aware of what our biases are, even the possibility of biases that we haven’t yet recognized. Do everything we can to get rid of them. 1:59:46 SC: And I know what some people are thinking here, “Isn’t there also a bias the other way? Or couldn’t there at least be a bias? Couldn’t there be a bias towards sort of the righteousness of feeling that you are oppressed and that gives you some extra handle on virtue or something like that?” Yeah, absolutely, 100%. I agree with the possibility of that bias. I think that we can all be bias. Again, It’s a human thing, it doesn’t belong to one group or another. We’re not rational. We’re not perfectly rational, perfectly virtuous, perfectly moral. We can all work to be better at it. But again, I think that there’s a sort of comparison to be done. If there are groups that are historically oppressed, picked on, not treated equally, I’m gonna be a little bit more sympathetic to them fighting against this than the people who are in the dominant group. 2:00:39 SC: I’m very sympathetic to worries about free speech, as I said. I think that we could do a much better job, those of us who believe that free speech is important. I think we could do a much better job in acknowledging and understanding and talking about the reasons why certain people don’t want to be subjected to certain kinds of speech. If you simply don’t understand that motivation, then you’re not being rational, you’re not being intellectual, you’re not facing up to reality. I try my best to understand why certain people don’t want certain speech acts to happen. And to understand why that isn’t work within it, my current understanding, just like the vegetarianism, is that nevertheless, despite the very real harm that speech can do, it’s worth it. It can be put in certain regions, like you needn’t be forced to hear certain kinds of speech. There should be safe spaces where you can avoid certain kinds of speech, but there should be other spaces where that speech is available, if that’s what you want to go to. 2:01:44 SC: I do believe that there are people who go overboard in fighting for racial justice or sexual justice or whatever, and they become so enthusiastic that they wanna shut down people who disagree with them. And I don’t come to that conclusion. I disagree with those people. That doesn’t make them my enemy. If I reach a point personally where people who go overboard because they’re fighting against racism and sexism and discrimination, I start thinking of them as my enemies rather than allies I disagree with, then I’m gonna have to rethink my own life choices here. I’m gonna have to take a step back and think about where I am. I can be on the same side against racism as someone whose tactics and strategies I disagree with. I have no trouble believing that at all. 2:02:30 SC: I did on Twitter, at one point, tried to promote the idea of Millian social justice, after John Stuart Mill. Of course, the famous philosopher who gave the most eloquent defense of free speech and the free market of ideas. And he also gave a very, very eloquent defense of the rights of women. Now, it may be that his wife, Harriet Taylor… I don’t know… Actually, I don’t know if they got married. I think they get married later in life. But Harriet Taylor probably was responsible for a lot of the ideas and even some of the writing in The Subjugation of Women and some other of Mill’s books. But I like the idea that things like freedom of speech, the free market of ideas, the give and take of dialogue and discussion and openness, the realization that we’re all fallible and imperfect and biased and working to get better. 2:03:21 SC: All of that taken together is a powerful force, could be a powerful force for social justice, not just against it. That if we do it right, if we talk to each other in the right way, if we are open to listening to other people, if we are opening to admitting that we’re not perfect, that we come with a bundle of ideas beneath the surface that we might not even be aware of and we can always do work to improve them. And one of the ways to improve them is to listen to other people, listen to people who we disagree with. Even if we end up still disagreeing with them, even if we learn nothing, doing a little bit of listening. I think that doing that in good faith is actually a great force for making the world better, including fighting against racism, sexism, other forms of bias and discrimination. 2:04:11 SC: I’m hoping that in some broad but minor sense, the podcast pushes us in that direction. I don’t wanna actually spend a lot of time on Mindscape talking to out-and-out racists, but I do wanna talk to people I disagree with, especially about strategies for making the world a better place. All of this, as I said, very much at the beginning of this overly long solo podcast, all of this is very tentative in my mind. These areas of being a good person, being moral, having good ethics, these aren’t things that anyone should be all that certain about in their own minds. We can all learn and do better. I’m trying, trying to do better. Hopefully, we’re all trying to do better. Let’s see how well we do. Thanks for listening. Bye-bye. [music]		  Thank you Dr Carroll!! In your discussion of the IDW, I had hoped that you would have mentioned the suppression of thought that occurred with Nick Christakis, former guest, and his wife Erika, Bret Weinstein and his wife, Heather Heyling, as well as, what happened to Jonathon Haight, at NYU. Political correctness is something to be mindful of. I refer all to Tom Wolfe’s 1970 book, “Radical Chic and Mau, Mauing the Flak Catchers”. As one who follows Hume, I boldly assert knowledge and open discussion is good.
I am guessing CalTech does not face some of the thought police efforts evident at Yale, Evergreen or NYU.
(Nothing I say, should cause anyone to conclude I do not believe that social injustice, climate change and inequality exists and needs to be considered.) This is going to be a pro-vegetarian comment, but I want to start with a few caveats:
1. My arguments assume one lives in a first-world country where it is economically feasible to subsist on plant products alone.
2. I will limit the scope to vertebrates, since there is such a wide spectrum of living being with vastly different abilities to experience suffering.
3. I am going to argue for “reductionism” more-so than vegetarianism, as your stated desire of “animals on farms living as happily as they can up until the moment they are killed” is consistent with *an* omnivorous society, but I will hope to point out why they are not consistent with the *reality* of our omnivorous society.
4. I am not trying to make anyone feel bad, but will probably inevitably do so. Hopefully this doesn’t come across as “holier-than-thou,” I am simply trying to state my case by stating facts, many of which are unpleasant and make people (myself included) feel bad. Now for my comments. I am glad that you recognize that the reality of animal agriculture isn’t “animals on farms living as happily as they can up until the moment they are killed.” This concept simply does not exist outside of certain extremely small, niche farms. The cows you see grazing in pastures while you drive by on country roads does not represent reality. The reality is that the vast majority of animals are raised in concentrated animal feeding operations (CAFOs). To transition to a system where we have “animals on farms living as happily as they can up until the moment they are killed” would be economically and environmentally unsustainable if the demand for animal products remains as high as it is. Below is a small sampling of things that I think would have to happen for us to reach such a state. I am not saying these things to be accusatory or to make anyone feel bad. I’m saying them because it is imperative that one understands that this is the economy of scale that the animal agriculture industry has achieved, and the level of efficiency that they operate at.
1. The footprint of the land used would have to drastically increase. Cages, veal sheds, etc. would have to go. The footprint would need to increase by probably at least an order of magnitude.
2. We would have to use less efficient breeds of animals, as many of them have been bred for maximum yield at the expense of the health of the animal. For example:
	a. Broiler chickens grow incredibly fast and incredibly large to the detriment of their own health.
	b. Commercial hens have been bred to lay ~300 eggs a year. In the wild they lay ~12 per year. Imagine the toll that menstruating ~300 times in a year would have on a human woman.
	c. Many people know that sheep will “overheat” if they are not sheared. This is only true because we bred out the genes that caused them to shed naturally, as it increases their yield. This has led to practices such as mulesing (removing skin around the anus so that it scars over and does not grow hair there, as it would become easily infected).
3. Inhumane practices such as de-horning, de-beaking, mulesing (see above) etc. would need to be stopped. Again, these practices are done for the sake of efficiency. We would have to throw efficiency out the window in order to achieve a reality where we have “animals on farms living as happily as they can up until the moment they are killed.” In this reality, animal products would be an expensive luxury that one could perhaps only a few times a week, or if they hunted the animal themselves. Any higher demand would necessitate that we revert back to these practices in order to meet it. In conclusion, to those who agree with the ideal of “animals on farms living as happily as they can up until the moment they are killed,” I would hope that you choose to live in accordance with that ideal by doing one of the following:
1. Eating vegan or vegetarian.
2. Greatly reducing your animal consumption and making sure that you responsibly source the animal products that you do consume. (You will probably find that the “responsibly sourcing” step is so difficult and cumbersome that it is easier to simply resort to suggestion #1). Here is one last thought to ponder, but which I won’t get into in this comment. But if you want to respond to it, feel free:
Some mentally retarded humans have cognitive and communicative abilities at (or below) the level of animals that we eat. Would killing and eating them be a “morally neutral” act? (Let’s suppose they have no friends or family who cares for them). If not, then why not? Hi Dr. Carroll,      I loved your Great Courses series as I love this podcast, but I am a little disappointed: your choice of iconic (I HATE THIS WORD–but it’s appropriate here….) moral conundrums, vegetarianism and whether multiculturalism has gone “too far”, fails to reckon with what I consider the most pregnant moral conundrum we as a species–or, most importantly, those of us endowed with a somehow politically resonant voice, which is not a free good–face, that of so-called “economic” growth, under the strictures of capitalist Neo-liberal “democracy”, which is (as a scientist I would appreciate your take on this) clearly self-destructive (except maybe for an escaping few), or at least a period of sacrificial socialism that allows for a transition to s rational  society of technological and environmentally neutral proliferation of wealth.  Why did you pick the subjects you did to the detriment of my concern (not that this is “wrong”, of course)? Recent research knows that animals from rats to chimps and elephants have emotions. Will that change your analysis about the way we use them (eat, experiment, keep in captivity). Here is a recent discussion on the subject, in particular the  first speaker de Waals http://www.bigpicturescience.org/episodes/animals-like-us?fbclid=IwAR3_EhWdZYbK-CJT3uiOZC878XFJfztQPBlSIJHo-sAzP4rz11jNjw2112E What happened to the Scott Aaronson interview that was mentioned? Also, speaking of animals eating animals, have Sean B. Carroll on the podcast. I enjoyed his Royal Inst. video on Africa. Are we allowed to talk about men having an innately higher preference for things and systematizing, vs people and nurturing for women? You don’t talk about it, so presumably you think it’s better off not talked about? Where I see the trouble is, without this in the conversation, we don’t frame the problem as how to encourage young girls and women, so much as constantly blame men (especially white men) for the oppression. Also, would you agree that the left hasn’t learned how to draw a line where they are going too far, and need to have that conversation? Right now I’m witnessing a “debate” on whether it is okay to beat a journalist to the point of brain bleed for having a wrong opinion. In temperament I’m very left but I absolutely can’t deal with the extreme version. (Which unfortunately is the version that seems to have crept in where I work, in tech and startups.) I’m also in the awkward position (to the left) that I think Jordan Peterson cured my depression and convinced me to sort out my own problems, and that a sustainable society _by definition_ needs to care about reproduction and group responsibility for raising the next generation. After growing up on Mr. Rogers and Carl Sagan, previously I was a huge fan of New Atheism, Stephen Pinker, and yourself, but their attempts to inspire meaning fell completely flat for me. Sure I’m a unique creature in the cosmos and multiverse with a chance to exist but that didn’t explain why I was lying in bed calculating how long it would take to hit the ground if I threw myself off my 22nd floor balcony, and why I was completely invisible to women despite a successful career. I needed to sort that out, and JP gave me the psychological tools for it. PS: huge fan of your science writing and lectures, and a podcast of you engaging with Eric Weinstein would be a dream. Really excellent. I almost didn’t listen, I wanted another #52, which I thought was brilliant. But you hooked me in with references to ‘The Big Picture’ which is an important book for me.  And in fact, I think this podcast has the same things I value in ‘The Big Picture’. That spirit of inquiry. Of the ‘intellectual’. I’ll listen to all you podcasts, but I’m hopin for more like thsi. I thought about this yesterday and slept on it. I still think it’s a good idea for you, Sean: Couples Therapy.
Recently, I viewed Sam Harris interviewing his wife, Annika, about her new book and he was almost giggling and he did laugh. This epiphenomenon deserves more attention. There are so many similar incredible couples;
You and Jennifer, Bret Weinstein and Heather, Eric Weinstein and Pia, Nick and Erica Christakis. There needs to be a forum where two such couples meet and exchange ideas. (I think the female participation reduces ego and conflict but that is only a hope until proven.) It may be unwieldy though. I would suggest David Reich and his wife Eugenie as a first possibility. Regardless, David would be very interesting by himself, I am sure. Hi Sean,
Great podcast this one kept me up most of the night thinking !! I reluctantly agree that there appears to be no objective morality. I one joked in this “Trumpian” era, that I couldn’t wait for a benevolent AI to take over global governance. The reality is that any attempt to program moral rules into that AI rapidly begins to look like global communism, where the GDP of the world would likely be redistributed to about $17000 USD per person. It is hard to argue against the morality of giving 90% or more the population a increase in living standards unless  you are in the other 10%.
Alternatively the AI could place a utility value on all future lives that could possibly be lived then it could easily justify the morality of nuclear disarmament by any means necessary including a first strike if survivors could be predicted and the time line was long enough . Its clear that hard moral rules require a level of cognitive dissonance to selectively apply and if the same AI was programmed to enforce “the ten commandments” then it would rapidly look like a dystopian future. This podcast forced me to think about the moral rules I have adopted from society without thinking about them. It is shocking to see how much discount our society places on the lives and well being of other people who are not in our “in group”. I think you are having tunnel vision about what reality is. The distinction between naturalism versus religion is completely obvious for science.  No discussion here. But your definition of reality is too generic on the one hand and too limited on the orther hand. You overlooked the difference between living beings and dead matter. Sure everything at the smallest level looks the same: quantum. But a living creature has feelings and that is the most relevant feature when discussing morality. You basically missed biology completely and you end up with an akward nerdy vision on moral issues. Please read Sapolsky and De Waal and try again . Hi Sean.
Thanks for this podcast, it was very thoughtful and you did a good job of explaining your opinions on these subjects. Regarding vegetarianism, I tend to agree with everything you have said here. It may well be that we eventually discover that animals actually do a number of the aspects you have attributed to human beings, but it is still likely that we will never be able to explain our human systems to other animals.
I have attempted to be a vegan and vegetarian at a number of points in my life. This was due to a number of factors, the largest of which was due to working in the food industry as a factory auditor and product expert for 15 years, where I learn a lot of things about food processing that I became uncomfortable with. But ultimately I could not find a diet that suited me for the long term, always ending up feeling lethargic and developing anxiety issues, so instead I now opt to more or less limit my meat consumption to once every 21 meals and this seems to do the job nicely.  I do think you have been a little disingenuous about the IDW. Whilst your description of them as individuals and the issues with the group and its name is definitely correct. Using the concept of a demiurge that lies at the bottom of all human ideas as the reason they are incorrect is a poor show. All theories and concepts contain a demiurgical position, The theories of physics have black holes, big bangs, holography, mathematical infinities, etc.
Whilst I cannot speak for the others in the IDW group, Jordan Peterson particularly is very open and honest about where his downfalls are and where he is blindsided in his knowledge.  I am sure you are correct about discrimination in science, and it is vital that all people are equal throughout society, but please can I add that outcome equality is not the answer. Individuals should have the opportunity to pursue whatever they enjoy, and their skills should be developed and honed accordingly. Perhaps the things and lessons we give children should be more gender neutral and earlier education should attempt to ensure that all people are shown as many things/sectors/ideas/cross-sections as possible. Whilst you gave great examples of historical plight of women and blacks in America, in the UK, where I live, the largest proportion of the poorest of people are white males.
My partner works for a UK women’s charity and they provide money and help to impoverished single women. The charity has existed for around 150 years and they do great work. However, all the societal data that they use always shows that impoverished white males (IWM) are the worst off in the country. IWM get the least assistance with obtaining higher education, have the largest drug addiction issues, highest suicides, lowest income, etc, etc, et all, literally.  In my opinion, the poor are nudged far harder than any individual woman away from education and from trying to develop real hopes and independent ideas. “But I, being poor, have only my dreams; I have spread my dreams under your feet; Tread softly because you tread on my dreams.” William Butler Yeats Wealth privilege is the real privilege. Their are plenty of white males who discrimate against other white males, because they sound stupid, appear to have a low iq, come from a poorer background, etc, etc.
There is a black privilege too according to the general idea espoused in public , it just isn’t as interesting to the current zeitgeist as white male privilege.
Also please don’t misinterpret me, non-whites and women in general have definitely been mistreated by RICH whites and males accordingly, but equality is for all, and all mistreatments and issues should be equalized and repaired in the fairness of time. Also regarding your discussion on empathy, listening isn’t empathy. Often people lie to themselves, misinterpreted information and don’t know their own position, either as they are undecided or have not yet determined the variables, so expecting the limited small mouth noises we use to communicate to be an acceptable tool for determining empathy is incorrect. The dictionary definition of empathy is: ‘the ability to understand and share the feelings of another’ In my opinion, this is done by placing yourself in their shoes, and placing them in yours. You can, have, and do develop deep empathy for things and people you have nor will never have the ability to speak and listen to. Listening can be part of empathy but it in no way defines what it means to have it. Empathy should always be directed to all, those we consider our lesser and also to those we consider our greater, friends and enemies, empathy should extend to animals, plants and all things made from whatever this universe is and perhaps even to the ideas that exist beyond the rules of this manifold.  The term is EQUALITY, nothing else. A persons belongs wherever they want to belong, male and female. And I don’t mean by whim, but by their intentions and interests.  Equality means to level the playing field for all and stop playing favourites. I think you truly are a great man and very much enjoy listening to all of the lectures and podcasts you produce and are involved with, and i appreciate you greatly for releasing a podcast on the difficult and contentious subjects you discussed here. Also, if you have any interest in the following things, if you found a way to weave them into future podcasts I would be delighted, Penrose’s CCC, Hawking Points, Quasicrystals, VSL, E8 lattice, Cellular Automaton as discussed in A New Kind of Science. Based on the introductory comments, I would categorize my moral philosophy as utilitarian. That said, the issue I take with your monologue is the linking of personal virtue and public policy. One has nothing to do with another. As an easy illustration, allow me to use abortion, which was addressed briefly in the introductory comments. Abortion is immoral because a human life is being destroyed. A fetus is a person and not an infection. Nevertheless, as a matter of public policy abortion should not be illegal. Why? I lived in a third world country where Roman Catholicism was predominant and abortion was illegal. A young woman in the town where I lived became pregnant and she knew that she could not support a child. She sought an abortion and found a woman who was willing to do it. The woman had no medical training. The fetus was killed. So was the young woman. Two lives were lost. If abortion had been legal, only one life would have been lost. Because of my utilitarian bias, I am opposed to abortion and I am opposed to laws against abortion as a matter of public policy. The moral thing to do is to encourage contraception and to find couples that are willing and able to raise children whose mothers can’t raise them. Regarding the consumption of slaughtered animals, I limit my comments here to the raising of those animals and climate change. There is a strong moral argument for not consuming meat or poultry from a purely utilitarian viewpoint. It should be a matter of voluntary action and not a matter of public policy. Then there is the intellectual dark web. The IDW is a consequence of political correctness. Reference was made to “Thinking Fast and Slow” by Daniel Kahneman. Political correctness resembles religion in that it is a creed for people on the left who prefer to think fast and not attend to the arguments of slow thinkers who disagree with the creed in part or in whole. I am one of those slow thinkers. Writing this response will probably make me part of the IDW. Your monologue linked the IDW with the legacy of slavery and racism in the United States. That linking was very religious of you and you are not ordinarily a religious person. The moral thing for all of us to do is to think more before we speak and before we act, and to encourage others to do the same thing. Changing that behavior is a very difficult first step necessary to destroying the legacy of slavery, to put us back in the geological era we had been in prior to the industrial revolution, and to improving the welfare of people in our households and people around the world. The problem is not that you say we should fight to stop discrimination. It is that you say it blanketly and without absolute proof of instances of it. You just give a few personal examples and conclude that it must be true across the board.  People on all sides of the IDW would love to tackle discrimination at any point that it is proven to exist. The problem is with assuming discrimination and demanding rules to alter outcomes to create equality of outcome when you never have any evidence that the outcome should be equal at any plane. All you are doing is enforcing a different kind of discrimination that is unfair to right an unproven discrimination you hold in your mind.  The way you formulated your statement as a pantomime of an IDW advocate which was “I care about free speech, not about racism”, shows your implicit bias and prejudgment of what is in the minds of those in it and that support it.  This was nothing but a practice in showing your bias, and not approaching true intellectualism. Bem, Sean Carroll, julgo que sou uma construtivista.
 Não vegetariana (embora, prefira legumes, fruta, cereais, a maior parte de carne, a exceção de frango, pato e peru). Questão de gosto pessoal, não, opção!
“Previlegio” de ser heterossexual!
Mente aberta! Geralmente, tento não agir/julgar, preconceituosamente. Mas, falho, muitas vezes, de certeza!
Concordo “….. ficamos aquém de ser perfeitamente racionais..”, “……… a força da razão, é imperfeita…”
Conforme refere, todos podemos aprender, e, fazer melhor, para tornar o mundo, um lugar mais agradável!
Obrigada Sean Carroll!
Extenso, mas, muito interessante!
Não estou a ser” não intelectual”!!! 😊😊 Great podcast and very thought provoking, but I’m not with you on numerous points.  I have been a part of the professional workforce of large companies for the last 40 years, and have worked side by side and been supervised by dozens of people of varying ethnicities. All these companies have been bound by laws that mandated affirmative action.  To present the “oppression” and “systemic racism” in the way that you stated it gives minorties the false and exaggerated impression that they are “victims” being held down by “the man”.  And that is not doing them any favors,  we live in the most equitable, fair,multicultural society in human history.  Multicultural and multiethnic societies are very difficult to maintain. Your not doing anyone a favor by creating “victims” that are largely imaginary. Dude, I think youre in the IDW and youre in denial about it. Your entire argument against the group relies on straw manning individual member’s bad or questionable ideas without recognizing that other members publicly oppose to those ideas. The only unifying ethos of the group is that EVERYTHING needs to be discussable… and you say as much in this podcast. I was very excited to hear in the intro to this episode that it would be dealing with morality and ethics associated with animals.  I presently can’t adequately express how disappointed I was with how it was brushed off.
Something in particular that grated was the bit about eating your cats being not ok because of the human affinity and connection with them.  This is an example of humans being massively self-centred.
The number of conflicting statements regarding being against suffering and yet not seeing the issue with exploiting animals was very dismaying.  Even more so when the subsequent discussions about the IDW and intellectuals quest for the truth, and mentions of racism and sexism.  How can one not see the connection with speciesism?   You mentioned intersectionality – make the connection !!! Thank you always, Sean, for your podcast. In your discussion of morality, I think you set up a  bit of a straw man regarding deriving “ought” from “is.” No one has claimed that ought could be derived from the laws of physics or what’s ‘out there’ in the universe. Oughts can be derived from our knowledge of what we are as conscious beings. These are going to be quite general (rules of thumb) because we don’t have all the answers for all situations. That things “could have been different” doesn’t change what is.  Near the end of your discussion, you snuck in ideas that have everything to do with the “well-being of conscious creatures” (as Sam Harris says) — and of course that’s very close to where your own moral sense lies. Case in point – your discussion about killing. It’s not just about having “invented a rule” or “constructed a rule” — in fact, you derived OUGHT (the rule) from IS (people don’t want to be killled (and other factors), etc.) A thoughtful discussion which prods the listener to a thoughtful consideration of the topic. Many thanks for your continued effort to put science & the humanities in the public space. Hi Sean, I really enjoy your podcast. It’s one that both informs me, and also stimulates thought on complex issues. On this episode, I found that although I probably agree with you on the vast majority of the matters at hand, you did a deep enough dive that there were plenty of things, sometimes approaches, sometimes assumptions, that I disagree with. Our areas of agreement are great,  but our areas of disagreement are interesting, so that’s what I’m going to talk about. I’ll apologize in advance, but my criticisms/disagreements will probably be fairly granular, and risk seeming pedantic. I’ll do my best to explain why they are not pedantic. With that in mind… The first is a general observation. Throughout this podcast you seem to have difficulty imagining people holding different moral views in good conscience. That’s a pretty normal, human thing, but like how it’s important to account for, correct for, or otherwise mitigate our biases in science, it’s just as important in ethics. Right off the bat, you say that you think most people who are against women having the freedom to have abortions are really just interested in controlling women’s bodies (but there are some people who have honest religious convictions). This is a supposition that you don’t cite facts to support, which makes me think you believe it is so obvious that it doesn’t warrant offering evidence for, which would imply a failure to imagine a good conscience disagreement (yes, you concede that a small number of people, only for religious reason, which in this context implies irrational reason, hold the belief honestly). Maybe there’s another explanation that I’m missing. I think that presenting the issue as if what one’s interests are (controlling a woman’s body) and what their belief is (abortion is evil) are competing or dichotomous is misleading, and that imagining that the majority of a really large number of people don’t agree on honest ground is a bad assumption to make without strong supporting evidence. Our belief and interests inform each other, both on a surface and obvious way (cognitive biases), and on a much deeper level (“science is true because it works” is expressing the relationship between belief and interest). I won’t beat that horse any further, but I think it’s worth consideration, and I might circle back to it. FWIW, I think the question of abortion is intellectually a much more difficult question to deal with than you give it credit for. Sure, we can agree that a single cell shouldn’t be granted rights. We can also agree that a born human should. If there’s no magic (which we agree), then there’s no magical moment when those rights should be granted. If, for the sake of discussion, we set aside the hardship on the woman, there is no obvious, non-problematic method or standard to apply to determine the demarcation point between rights bearing human and generic bundle of cells. I wonder why you think it’s such a no-brainer? I want to talk about the is/ought issue. I don’t really like the way this issue usually gets framed, and this wasn’t any different. The way it’s presented is that we can let facts inform our moral decision making, but they can’t tell us anything about underlying moral principles, or inversely, as Sam Harris would have it, we can infer ought from is directly in a naive way. I submit that what we, English speakers, collectively mean when we say something is morally good, is an empirical question. That’s the reason why we can’t just create a “moral system” like it were a math equation, and dismiss our moral intuitions if they don’t match what the formula spits out. If you were explaining good or bad to someone learning English, what would you do? “Good… like Superman. Being nice to someone” “Bad… hurting someone. Cheating or lying”. If we analyse those things which are considered good, and those that are considered bad (currently and historically), we can actually draw some conclusions. Morally good behavior is that which maximizes the health of the group, and morally bad behavior threatens the health of the group. This framing has the benefit of being consistent with the facts of the matter, and it also gives us guidelines to deal with morally difficult questions. The biggest difficulty comes with determining who is included in “the group”. Arbitrary historical, geographical ethnic and political distinctions don’t make much sense (which is why post-modern moral relativism doesn’t work). “All of humanity” seems roughly workable. If we look at humanity as an organism (a super complex one at that!), then moral questions can be framed in terms of how they effect the overall health of the organism. In general, not killing each other on large scale is probably the largest moral good, and all of our rules regarding honesty, property, liberty, punishment and fair dealing all exist to keep us from killing each other en masse. I think that from this “is”,  what we mean as humans when we talk about morality, we can infer an “ought”, but it is nothing so simplistic as individual well being. i want to make an important distinction here. I am not talking exclusively about moral agents here. Children, invalids, pets, maybe even corpses get some level of moral consideration for no reason other than that they are part (to some degree or another) of the group. They are parts of the organism.  How does that apply to vegetarianism? Well, my current take on that depends on which argument for vegetarianism you present. Singer’s take, that the distinction between not killing people and animals is arbitrary, doesn’t hold up, unless you expand the group to include any arbitrary organism. It’s an interesting thought experiment, and I’m not sure if i have a conclusive answer to it, but my current thoughts are that we have a psychological and emotional scaffolding that we build our morality on, and it naturally makes the distinction between species, and the energy required to subvert that would need to be justified by a big advantage in the health of the organism. To put it another way, at some point, if the organism keeps taking on mass, it might collapse under it’s own weight. It’s still an empirical question, but one that might not be easy, or even currently possible to answer. The more common argument for vegetarianism is that it’s socially and ecologically responsible, and/or that the current industries are unduly cruel. I would equate the first part of that to owning a motor vehicle. Most people know that driving is horrible for the environment, but do it anyways, because it’s not convenient to find alternatives. We can probably agree that this is a non-optimal state of affairs. We can also probably agree that prohibiting driving, legally or morally, is excessive. We agree that there are a range of non-optimal behaviors that might not be encouraged, but are allowed. Meat eating seems to me to fall into that category.  Regarding your discussion of the IDW, I agree with much of what you said, but I feel like you took the low hanging fruit. There are tons of poorly formed arguments, implications and just general nonsense that can be found listening to Shapiro, Peterson et al. I don’t think you addressed the most reasonable versions of their positions though. I find Pinker to have impeccable reasoning and can find little fault with what he says. I don’t know if he qualifies as being part of the IDW, but he does talk about political correctness, and about gender disparity in STEM, and nothing you said would address anything he says on the matter. In a nutshell, he says that we obviously should remove any barriers to women who want to go into STEM, but for reasons that are likely at least partially biological, less women have interest in the field. It’s pretty uncontroversial to talk about gender manifesting behavioral differences in species other than human, but it has become a bit of a taboo to talk about it in humans, because we worry that crazy men’s right advocates, or old boy’s club politicians will use it to justify gender based discrimination. As NDG so eloquently put it, the facts don’t care what you think, and they also don’t care what their political implications are. They are still facts, and if we are smart, we want all the relevant facts. What if women just aren’t as interested in STEM jobs as men are? Does that mean it’s okay to discriminate against those women that are interested? Of course not. However, if we see a disparity in women going into STEM, we may not want to immediately jump to the conclusion that the cause of this is that they are kept out or discouraged by discriminatory behavior. So that’s my summary of Pinker on gender disparity in STEM. I also want to reference a Q&A after a Pinker/Harris discussion, where the audience member asks about identity politics, and why they focus on it on the left so much. Why don’t they focus on it on the right?  Harris responded “It’s just so obviously a problem on the right. Does anything need to be said about why it’s problematic to be a white supremacist?” A note about moral realism vs. moral constructivism. I find this another misleading framing. There are rules to the game of chess. That’s a fact of the world. It is a fact of the world that in the game of chess, a bishop may only move diagonally. If you take a chess board, and play a game of checkers with chess pieces, you are unquestionable not playing chess. It is also a fact that the rules of chess are constructed. It is possible that chess players, as a community of people who agree on the rules, can negotiate to change these rules, and it can still be chess. We know that the very first version of chess rules were different than the current rules. Are the rules, therefore arbitrary? Of course not. They are based on shared values. Chess players want the game to be non-arbitrary, so that the best player will win. They want it to be challenging and complex. They want it to be unpredictable. I’m not really a chess player, so I’m probably missing all sorts of other things. The point is, that it’s actually pretty easy to find shared goals, and rules end up being negotiated to meet those shared goals. I see this as a great analogy to ethics. I don’t think that’s really a disagreement, but maybe it will offer some clarification to your own thoughts. Okay, that’s it. It’s probably a little disorganized. I hope it’s not totally out to lunch (I’m pretty sure it’s not). Thanks again for the podcast, I’ll keep listening. One (okay two) last thing(s)… and I’m really out of my element. There are two things I think that I am almost certain you disagree with that concern your area of expertise, but I have yet to hear a compelling response to them. The first is, in really simple terms, isn’t the many worlds interpretation the least parsimonious model of the universe possible? Don’t you have to assume essentially infinite numbers of unevidenced universes? It’s thoroughly possible that my question is based on a fundamental misunderstanding of the MW interpretation, but that’s how it looks to me.  The second is a question about the relationship between science and philosophy, specifically as it relates to QM interpretations. It seems to me that the purview of science is to make theories that are falsifiable, and to test them. It is the purview of philosophy to interpret what that data “means” in the broader sense. That’s why it matters to me that Dennett is working with cognitive scientists. I don’t see this same dynamic much in particle physics, and that seems like a bit of a problem to me. Sean many have commented on your position on the IDW, but even though this may be repetitively redundant, I think most in the IDW are better than you believe and that your statement, “the idea that (IDW) is dedicated to open free dialogue is not at all borne out by the evidence”, unduly critical. In the last 6-9 months, the four Peterson-Harris moderated video debates were published and they seemed open and enlighting relative to many topics over close to eight hours.
You have debated Harris and, though Harris may have been Harris, it was worthwhile. (If your remarks about
Peterson are accurate that would be bad but I have not seen the evidence and nothing similar popped out with Harris.)
Stephen Woodford, Rationality Rules, offered a useful analysis of those debates often garnering 200,000 views. You might consider doing something like that with IDW “members” if you believe they are not being  open or accurate in the future. Does it not seem very inaccurate to group Sam Harris with the intellectual dark web?  He’s a liberal who believes racism is factually and morally wrong, and seems in pretty thorough agreement with modern scientific views. Thank you Dr.Carroll. Great episode. Well balanced Excellent and thoughtful podcast. Carroll points out that neither deontological nor consequentialist approaches to morality make sense.  There is no objective or real morality because “one cannot derive ought from is”.
Most moral philosophers subscribe to moral realism because otherwise they would be out of a job. Instead morality is constructed or invented by people and groups. Morality evolves from the self-interested need of people for rules to facilitate cooperation in groups. Morality evolves within a culture as the culture develops and evolves. It is always contextual and there is no maxim that effectively expresses a moral system. Taking Carroll a step further, I would say that morality is both subjective (never objective) and emergent in human social systems. Carroll is weakest in arguing that the “moral” reason why killing humans is bad is because humans can conceptualize the future. This seems a tenuous, even specious, conception on which to hang the murder prohibition.  Carroll is clearly trying to get to a conclusion that killing people is bad while killing animals may not be because they can’t conceptualize the future. That is just silly. I thoroughly enjoyed this talk. While I agree with the broad strokes of what Sean Carroll is saying regarding the current issues of racism and sexism being vastly more important than controversial speakers getting blocked from giving talks at universities, which in and of itself isn’t that big of a deal, I think he doesn’t address the larger point of concern that some have with this pattern, in that when a culture of normalcy around restricting speech or bullying people into silence is created, it can lead to worse consequences in the future. The recent assault of Andy Ngo is a small, recent example, but the larger concern what happens when that line of rationality becomes codified into laws, into forms of institutional repression (much like institutional racism or institutional sexism now) that we might have avoided by criticizing these behaviors in real time and preventing their normalization. I’d like to support Will’s comment above.. if you and Eric Weinstein don’t publicly enage it will be proof that we are all in serious trouble! If you two can’t meet on level ground and get into these details while being civil, then what hope is there for the rest of us?  EW was just on Rogan and they talked about your wifes’ story (Dear Guardian: You’ve Been Played). This was really upsetting to see how even you (spouse proxy) made it personal and ugly, unnecessarily. EW makes great points about how not everyone learns or test the same and this discourages people from being in protected organizations. I think it’s outliers like EW that don’t follow the rules/norms that shake up the stagnant. We need people doing that but you chide him? And in this podcast you talk about leveling the playing field? While we are all trying our best to shed our biases.. acknowledge you own too. This podcast was good. I listened twice because I disagree with a lot of it.. but it was platitudes (esp Harris on pronouns). JP, SH and the others all said they’d use requested pronouns, but that’s not the point. I know people that go out of their way to get their recreational outrage on.. they can’t wait to be outraged if someone guesses wrong when the pronoun is ambiguous. Get into the details.. you’re not noticing the shouting down and deplatforming because you’re aligned with those goals. Wait until ‘they’ turn on you when they go to far and you have the mob to deal with. You must have seen the BW videos at Evergreen? Why no comment on this in this podcast? Be fair and don’t cherry pick. Other professors out there are walking on eggshells and you should have commented on this! Also notice EW on Rogan talking about his support for intersex.. maybe start there were you agree. Pretty please get him on your show! Keep up the good work, Thanks To say that the solution to animal suffering on farms is not for consumers to eat a vegetarian diet but rather for government or industry to ensure perfectly humane farming conditions is like saying that the solution to single-use plastic waste is not to carry a reusable bag but for government or industry to ensure 100% end-to-end recycling of plastic.   You are fooling yourself if you think you’re a good person because someone else, somewhere else, should do something to prevent the harm you’re causing. at 2 hour mark.. you say that some might go “overboard” fighting for socail justice but that doesn’t make you disavow them.. you’d have to re-think your whole life. If their “tackitsc and stratigies” are criminal and violent, you’re still there ally. arg.. typos sorry: at 2 hour mark.. you say that some might “go overboard” fighting for social justice but that doesn’t make you disavow them.. you’d have to re-think your whole life, it’s that tough a decision? If their “tactics and strategies” become criminal and violent (eg: Andy Ngo), you’re still there ally? I’m really wanting cooler heads, like yours, to prevail and calm things down.. Is the following stuff from podcast 44 what you mean when you discuss the conceptualization of the future issue with non human creatures? Mindscape #44, your podcast interview with Antonio Damasio accessed some deeply felt needs and questions for me. Subsequently I acquired The Strange Order of Things, have read it and been studying it. The study is far from over for me. In Chapter 8, Consciousness, pages 144-148 subtitled Observing Consciousness, he discusses the verbal track that accompanies the movie-in-the-brain part of consciousness.
This he says ‘translates images hailing from the outside world, but also, of necessity images that come from the interior’. He further says nonhuman creatures cannot do this. “Is” can’t prove “ought”. Then 30 minutes later “blacks and women ~are~ underrepresented, so we ~ought~ to….” I really loved this episode and agreed with most of what Prof. Carroll talked about. I liked how he was able to admit that his ideas are a work in progress and that he is open to discussion. I want to bring up the few areas where I was confused or disagreed with his reasoning. I liked how he clarified the idea of “Constructivism”. I agree that the “meta-rules” or “axioms” of morality must be constructed, and after agreeing on them, we can then determine the rules / laws which will optimize our fulfillment of them. I think one point which Carroll quickly glossed over though is the agreeing and discussing of these constructed proposals. It seems that science *should* play a critical role in determine which proposals are better in these discussions. For example, one person might propose as an axiom that we follow an ancient text because it was written by the creator of the Universe who knows what is best for humanity, however with science we could show that this is a poor axiom, by demonstrating that the ancient text was actually written by humans and not an omniscient deity.  For another example, let’s assume that people agree that we should use an axiom where want to optimize the happiness of all sentient beings. Science again plays a critical role, because we can then do experiments where we test which rules actually do increase happiness and which don’t. We can look at how existing rules have affected human happiness in other civilizations. It seems science should be an important part of determining which rules we follow to make society better. whether that is implying “ought from is” is probably more of a semantic argument, but the fact that that science can tell us how we should act in many moral situations seems uncontroversial. I think probably the weakest argument in the podcast was on the morality of killing animals. I am also not a vegetarian, but I think the idea that it is justifiable to kill an animal which cannot imagine the future doesn’t work for several reasons. First, is that Carroll seems to identify some arbitrary future cut-off of “several weeks”. What about humans which have a mental disability where they cannot imagine that far into the future? It doesn’t seem like it would be ethical to kill them. Also for animals, Maybe your cat can’t imagine weeks into the future, but certainly they can imagine minutes, or at the very least seconds.  Where do you draw the line and why? If your goal is to minimize the amount of lost future time, then those minutes will add up after a few years of eating burgers. His argument also seemed to mention, but then set aside, the most serious problems with killing animals, which is suffering they endure, although the thought experiments of instant and painless deaths are very interesting. Maybe the area I found the most interesting was on the critique of the IDW. I don’t know that much about them except for Sam Harris. I guess my thought would be that perhaps the IDW is currently most fixated on these gender issues is that these are the current issues over which well-meaning people are being de-platformed and fired from their jobs. To me that seems more likely to the cause than they are sexist, but again I really only have listened to Harris about these issues.  I also liked the example of comparing free speech issues over racism to complaining about the soup when the kitchen is on fire. Perhaps a counter argument is that by restricting free speech on these issues its actually making the problems of racism worse and not better? But I think Carroll brings up totally valid points, and I’m at least curious how Sam Harris would respond. Bryan Sean, you currently have the best podcast in any genre. Two truths, possibly overlooked here though:
1) ALL AGENDA GROUPS BEGIN WITH THE ASSUMPTION THAT THE WORLD IS BROKEN AND NEEDS TO BE FIXED.
(If one disagrees with this wrong assumption then one may comment on agenda groups while maintaining personal integrity.  Otherwise, one lacks self awareness and are partners, peas in a pod, with all other agendas.  This is certainly the group in which the IDW falls.  Utter lack of self awareness.  Every single one of them.  However oposing agendas are equally misguided in this regard.)
2)THE PATH TO HELL IS PAVED WITH GOOD INTENTIONS . (true of each and every agenda including that of IDW and SJW.  “Morality” always falls into preferences that compensate for one’s weakness and play to their strength. This is what always establishes the basis for all “agenda groups”, both “in” and “out” groups.)  So, as imagined, you get this response.  It’s going to get much worse because what you did is, at least, equivalent to analyzing the merits of Scientology in a very public way.(you didn’t mention it, which doesn’t mean that you were not aware, but just in case).  While I sympathize with your point of view, it concerns me that you maybe believe there can be a rational discourse on the merits of opposing agendas.  I like you.  You quality of character is clear.  You do not belong in this, certainly unproductive, anti-realist podcast culture mud pit.  There are not any open minds that veiw the external as broken.  Between hosting Antonio Damasio and (didn’t you mention The Book of Job?, read Jung’s analysis of it) Job, Im a little surprised that you seem to genuinely believe in impersonal persuasion and disappointed by (what should be expected) the primacy of ego and identity in informing one’s world view. I wanted to make a comment about the vegetarian argument. I also am not a vegetarian and I partially agree with Sean Carroll’s argument. I think humans’ ability to understand the future, their own death, and so on is morally relevant. However, I think the argument overlooks a couple of things. I think it is interesting that the argument is framed as an argument about why it is moral to EAT animals but if carried to its logical conclusion it seems to me to lead to the conclusion that it is moral to KILL ANIMALS FOR ANY REASON whatsoever. If it is immoral to kill people because they can imagine the future while it is moral to kill animals because they can’t (a simplification of Sean’s argument) I don’t see why it would be immoral for someone to go down to the animal shelter, adopt all the animals they could and simply kill them, assuming it was done in a humane and painless way. Sean mentioned that we should take our moral intuitions seriously and I think we have a very strong moral intuition that it would be immoral to do that. And I think we correctly believe that a person who did do that is not someone who is likely to be a moral paragon in the rest of their lives. We would tend to think there was something seriously wrong with a person who decided to spend their time doing that. We would probably label them a sociopath which suggests to me a general moral prohibition on killing (with some exceptions) is a general part of our moral makeup.  I think we have a general moral aversion for killing but we allow some exceptions (eating animals, for example) when we have good reason to allow those exceptions (we need food to live and meat is one of the better sources for the nutrition we need). Absent a good reason (our nutritional needs) I think we would find killing animals immoral tout court which suggests to me that their inability to imagine the future is not the only reason we have for considering it okay to eat them. The fact that animals are unable to imagine the future is totally unconnected from the fact that they provide us with nutrition so it is not clear to me why it should matter whether they provide us with nutrition or not when we are trying to decide whether it is okay to kill them.  Sean mentioned that animals do not kill other animals unless they are some use to them. This is another way in which humans seem to differ from non-human animals. Some humans just enjoying killing other animals and we tend to find such people morally suspect. We say that such people don’t “respect life”. Our critique of people who do not “respect life” might partly be a matter of simple self-preservation. If someone does not “respect life” what is stopping them from killing me?  I doubt there are very many people who would find it morally okay to go to the pound to adopt animals just to kill them while also having a strong moral aversion to killing humans.  It seems likely to me that someone who has no moral aversion to killing animals at all is probably not someone who can be trusted to respect human life either. I don’t think the only reason you would be disinclined to kill your own kittens is because you have an emotional attachment to them (i.e. you would personally suffer or miss them). I think you probably also have a natural aversion to killing them because you sympathize and pity them in some sense. It would seem cruel to kill them. Killing a helpless animals just feels wrong. The point I am making is: I think the conclusion that Sean has drawn from his argument is that it is moral to EAT animals but I think the argument he is using to support that conclusion really supports a stronger conclusion, namely, that is is moral to KILL ANIMALS FOR ANY REASON, and since that does not seem to me to accord with our moral intuitions I suspect Sean’s argument is not the whole story about why it is moral (or immoral) to eat animals. I am not sure if we are supposed to respond to other comments but I feel compelled to respond to this comment from Jason: ““Is” can’t prove “ought”. Then 30 minutes later “blacks and women ~are~ underrepresented, so we ~ought~ to….” This is clearly not an accurate representation of Sean’s argument for two reasons. First, it misrepresents the factual claim that Sean is making. The factual claim is not simply that women and blacks are underrepresented but that discrimination based on race and gender plays some role in why they are underrepresented. Second, I am sure Sean would agree that no “ought” follows directly from that factual claim, but the only other claim you need to derive the “ought” is: discrimination based on gender or race is morally wrong (said differently, there is no moral justification for discrimination based on gender or race). So there are really only two statements Sean needs to make his argument: 1. Discrimination based on gender and/or race plays some role in the underrepresentation of women and blacks (in science and other fields).
2. Discrimination based on gender and/or race is morally wrong. It is very rare to find people who openly disagree with the second statement (the “ought” statement) so in practice the disagreement about this moral question really does boil down to a disagreement about a factual question (statement 1). Given that context it is perfectly legitimate for Sean to derive his ought from statement 1 since he is taking agreement regarding statement 2 for granted. If you don’t think the ought follows from the truth of statement 1 it must be because you disagree with statement 2. Do you disagree with statement 2 above? If so, you will need to provide a moral justification for why you think it is okay to discriminate against people based purely on their gender or race. Good luck… If there are certain human qualities that animals dont have that justifies us eating meat then we should be justified in eating humans ( like perhaps 18month old children for example) .This is one of the key difficulties  for the justification in eating meat. Whatever quality you think it is based upon , you are going to find humans that dont have it. It seems you recognised this problem and then just brushed it under the table without giving it the attention it deserves. I think if you were to really think about it you’ll realise its near impossible to justify eating animals but not at least some humans. So I would like to know how you would answer Harvard philosophers Robert Nozick challenge ( as i recall it, it was a long time ago I read his work): If we had a farm raising human babies for food , would you be okay with eating them? It seems given your logic you should. Furthermore the problem of suffering was also recognised and then similarly brushed under the table. When animals are killed for food they suffer , it is in a fantasy land only that they dont, so again that should lead you to being a veggie. On animals conceptualising the future I think this story illustrates quite well some advanced capabilities to do this: https://www.theguardian.com/science/2003/jul/03/research.science
and this may be of interest https://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/mental-time-travel-in-birds Brian, I’ll bite on your challenge. I agree with statement 1, but statement 2 is stronger than is necessary for Sean to make his argument. You could have a revised statement 2 based on facts alone: new 2. Non-merit based discrimination lowers the overall performance of that field. From this new #2 you can derive “ought”, e.g. therefore we ought to eliminate non-merit based discrimination. I would argue that your original statement #2 regarding morality is actually a consequence of the facts of the new #2. I know Carroll is very skeptical of this Utilitarian viewpoint, but to me it seems far more useful. Dear Professor Carrol, Thank you for outstanding July 1st Podcast. As always, you are an inspiring and engaging communicator and educator.  As a non-moralizing vegetarian who cooks meat at home for the rest of the fam (yes, we do exist), I thought you made a distinction that seemed a false dichotomy. To paraphrase, the killing of animals is not a moral dilemma because animals cannot anticipate their demise. Let me say that I do eat fish and if they weren’t so darned slippery, I’d catch them and cook them myself.  I just don’t want this to be moralizing in any way (let me buy you a steak dinner when you’re in New York)!  You also said that calling someone by his or her preferred pronoun was making the world a better place (agree). Can we also agree that people who wish to be called a particular pronoun don’t wish to be called anything else? By extension we can agree that just because an animal doesn’t know it’s about to die, it’s a non-sequitur to say it makes it permissible to end that life. It’s as if I said that it was not a moral issue whether I gave you cancer as long as you didn’t know about it.  Perhaps extreme, but the adage that what you don’t know won’t hurt you falls flat. It seems to me that acting rationally (specially in an irrational time) even though one is a speck  and only proper governance can truly cure many of our ills, it is still good to do a little good. We must be careful when we say we can only act in ways that affect the larger society (darned, I failed at not moralizing, sorry).  Recognizing that a life is likely to ‘want’ to continue living, even if it’s a non-memory, in the moment, rudimentary beast way (Bayesan myself, sorry) means we might not want to have such a distinction.  I realize your thoughts are evolving and I humbly hope to help the evolution of an intellect I admire that is far greater than my own.  Respectfully and Admiringly yours, Alex S. Hey haven’t read the comments, but you’re actually better than you think you are at talking about this stuff. Maybe get hafstadter on the thing about high concept human morality… Ppl might be selling that guy short… Thanks for your work. Here is a link to Joseph Heath’s blog post dealing with similar issues. He doesn’t resolve the tension between “conservative” and “progressive” perspectives, but I feel he outlines the tension quite well. http://induecourse.ca/social-constructivism-the-basics/ I would be most interested to hear the two of you discussing this and other issues. Comments are closed. Sean Carroll hosts conversations with the world's most interesting thinkers. Science, society, philosophy, culture, arts, and ideas.