
There won’t be any regular episodes of Mindscape this week or next, as we take a holiday break. Regular service will resume on Monday January 7, 2019. In the meantime, here is a special Holiday Message. Most likely it will be of interest to very few people — there’s no real substantive content, just me talking about the State of the Podcast and some other things I’ve been doing. Thanks to everyone for listening, here’s looking toward great things in 2019!

Support Mindscape on Patreon or Paypal. There won’t be any regular episodes of Mindscape this week or next, as we take a holiday break. Regular service will resume on Monday January 7, 2019. In the meantime, here is a special Holiday Message. Most likely it will be of interest to very few people — there’s no real substantive content, just me talking about the State of the Podcast and some other things I’ve been doing. Thanks to everyone for listening, here’s looking toward great things in 2019! Support Mindscape on Patreon or Paypal.  I suggest you interview Allison Pregler or Brad Jones about So Bad They’re Good Movies. How can a movie be so bad it’s good? What makes a movie fall into this category? How come bad comedies are so painful to sit through? Love the podcast. It hits a lot of right notes for me. One that’s especially good is the thrust to engage dissenting views with grace, and a desire to have a constructive discussion. That’s a rare skill, and I would very much like to learn to be better at it. Peace out. Happy holidays, I was not one of the people who complained for physics only – I much prefer the varied never-know-what topics. Also, I prefer the audio only format so I can listen while I am driving. I just don’t have patience to sit and watch a video interview. The other problem with video interview is that once people go video people clamor for special effects, power point, maps and charts etc., and if the podcast goes that direction then listening to the audio only will become impossible. . . . Love the podcast, and I’m very much looking forward to your book. Please interview the Stanford physicist, Leonard Susskind and the polymath Eric Weinstein. They would be fascinating guests. Also please do an episode devoted to the current state of research on Alzheimer’s disease causes and treatment. Happy Holidays! Audio quality has been good for these, IMHO, but I am in general not bothered by audio quality in interviews so long as it is coherent (low bar, I guess). I would suggest interviewing James Wathey, a neuroscientist out of CA who has written a pretty interesting book on the neurobiological basis of religious belief. Would also like some discussion of the free energy principle (have not listened to every episode so maybe this was touched on already). Informative…  thank you.   My three favorite podcasts were the one where you spoke solo,  poker player Liv Boeree, and the movie director, Scott  Derrickson.  However, all enjoyable.  Thanks for all you do. 1) I think some guests like the poker player, musicians, sci-fi writer, etc. are a little riskier because they are different, but at the same time, when listeners like a guest they didn’t expect to like, that’s where the biggest reward is IMO. For instance, I enjoyed the jazz player much more than I expected. 2) I have a desire to hear guests that offer alternatives to main theories within physics (such as string theory) that aren’t completely off-the-wall fringe. 3) I would love to hear a guest that knows about nuclear fusion progress. The last I heard, a new magnet was developed to contain the core, but I’d like to hear a lot more detail to fill in the holes of my knowledge. 4) I would like to hear more about how science and politics come together, especially on global warming. I believe that global warming is occurring, but that climate scientists are too alarmist about the issue, which is a position Scott Adams has stated. I would want to hear both someone who is on the side of the climate scientists and someone who takes my side so I can really make informed determinations about my position. 5) Finally, I (@DraftHobbyist) am still banned by you on Twitter. I have been for years. I really don’t know why. The only thing I can think is that I’m a Men’s Rights Activist and you might have a wrong impression of what I might believe because of that. You claim in this podcast that you want to talk with those you disagree with, yet you block people like me who you disagree with who did absolutely nothing wrong. I would appreciate you righting that wrong. Yours is my favorite podcast. I enjoy the diversity of interviewees, but if I do not feel that I will get anything/enough from any one, I listen for 15 minutes then turn off – beauty of podcasts.
Perhaps try to get Peter Atkins on. I suspect that his views on the Laws of Nature (saw the Research Institute lecture) do not have sufficient rigor. He is a bit of of a curmudgeon so …
If not, could you discuss his views on your next “Ask Me Anything”. Nice job Sean. Looking forward to more adventures. Happy Trails in 2019. I was one of those people who wanted more physics, but now I understand your philosophy and vision for this podcast and found many of the other podcasts fascinating. Keep it up. Nonetheless, I’m still very excited for your new book on quantum mechanics and the podcasts you’ll have on quantum mechanics. I’ve heard that the multiverse that arises from quantum mechanics, cosmology and string theory are all the same multiverse. I’d like to understand how that can be, maybe some guests like Brian Greene or Max Tegmark would be very enjoyable. I could listen to Sean Carroll solo episodes all day. So I have a question for the next one: Mr. Carroll do you think humankind will make it ? Whatever that means..
Greetings from Eastern Europe! Love the podcast… Can we have Sabine Hossenfelder as a guest? Please? Love the podcasts, including the balance of physics versus other stuff! If you’re looking for ideas of new topics, I’ll throw in my 2 cents: Green Chemistry, as a chemist this is a pet thing for me… I feel like chemistry can be somewhat stuck in the 20th century, it’s definitely lost ground to physics and biology image-wise! But to me this seems like a very exciting and important movement to bring things forward. John Warner is doing some nice things and is a good communicator, as a suggestion. Any interesting angles on the whole clean energy revolution, as a young person intending to live on earth for a few more decades this is another pet thing for me! Biofuels, maybe someone working at ITER, an impartial view of LFTR, energy storage systems, or anything else that seems cool to you. I would love to learn more about linguistics, it seems dead interesting. An economist would also be cool, the bitcoin episode teased me a bit on that! Maybe even the economics of trying to build a more sustainable society? The left-field topics like scaling laws and how cities may benefit conservation were really cool, surprising ideas like that are great And finally, I loved the vibe between you and Janna Levin, a bit of humor always brings a nice spark to the conversation! So guests who you know and have a bit of repartee with are a bonus. Hope there’s something useful in there. Look forward to hearing more from you this year! @ATHEIST4THECAUSE Finally, I (@DraftHobbyist) am still banned by you on Twitter. I have been for years. I really don’t know why. The only thing I can think is that I’m a Men’s Rights Activist and you might have a wrong impression of what I might believe because of that. But then, I suspect your declaration of being a “proud” Trump supporter would tend to confirm Sean’s prior impression of you… Really like your podcasts.  As for suggestions for future subjects & topics, I’d recommend linguistics.  I come from a linguistics background myself & think that many people would find it interesting.  As for a person to interview, I’d suggest John McWhorter, a linguistics prof. currently teaching at Columbia U., I believe.  I’ve read one of his books & some of his material online & he’s really smart & knowledgeable.  If you could get him for an interview it’d be a real coup, I think. Sean, Having just listened to your “Holiday Message” , I can only say, please don’t change anything. I love the broad range of topics and that you always manage to sneak in a bit of physics into just about every conversation.
I have loved all the podcasts but your chemistry with Wynton Marsalis was the standout for me.
My pick would be Yuval Noah Harari particularly for his views on AI
All the best for 2019 from Tasmania, Australia
PS. Patreon per episode is perfect and no ads if possible please. Please have a discussion with Edward Feser. I believe he works a short distance away from you. Comments are closed. Sean Carroll hosts conversations with the world's most interesting thinkers. Science, society, philosophy, culture, arts, and ideas.